Int. J. Engng Ed. Vol. 19, No. 5, pp. 754±758, 2003
Printed in Great Britain.

0949-149X/91 $3.00+0.00
# 2003 TEMPUS Publications.

A Self-Learning Environment based on the
PBL Approach: An Application to the
Learning Process in the Field of Robotics
and Manufacturing Systems*
FERNANDO RAMOS and ENRIQUE ESPINOSA
Instituto TecnoloÂgico y de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey, Mexico.
E-mail: framos@campus.mor.itesm.mx
This paper deals with a PBL approach used to bridge a teacher-centered learning to a studentcentered learning. It has been applied in undergraduate and graduate courses of robotics and
manufacturing systems with successful results. A cognitive analysis of the relationships between
abilities and the steps to solve problems has been carried-out to follow the actual behavior of the
students during the evolution of the course, as compared to the assumed one. Our goal was to
maintain a permanent challenge among the students that allows them to discover the relevant
aspects related to understanding, stating, representing and solving real world problems.

The problem
Given this way of teaching, an interesting, but
unsatisfactory, situation appeared. The students
usually tackle a problem without making an analysis to understand, state and solve it. This practice is
frequently used in courses with programming
activities, where the students write a program
even in the absence of a previous analysis. At the
end of the course, important frustrations may
show up, when they feel that they do not know
how to solve problems at all.

INTRODUCTION
IMPORTANT OBJECTIVES of an engineering
course include the learning of concepts and the
solution of problems related to the topics in the
curriculum. The problems treated in the course
should cover the process of understanding, statement and search of different alternatives for their
solution [1]. The curriculum of an engineering
course seems to be naturally designed around the
solution of problems, which in the best of the cases
should be real world problems, where the main
goal is that the student develops enough abilities
and skills. These abilities and skills are related to
the analysis, abstraction, interrelationships
between the main actors of the problems to be
solved: inductive reasoning and analogy. They are
needed to learn to state, represent and solve
engineering problems, which will be part of their
daily tasks in the real life.
However, traditional learning models related
to engineering education in Mexico are teachercentered. The instructor presents the concepts
and issues as a lecture, without establishing
important challenges to the students. In addition,
most of the coursework does not take into
consideration real world situations. This results
in important drawbacks mainly related with the
motivation of students, and a lack of interest in
the course. The only interest the students exhibit
is to obtain good results in exams in order to
pass the course.

THE OBJECTIVE
Our main purpose is to build a student-centered
model based on a PBL approach, which serves as a
bridge from a teacher-centered environment to a
self-learning environment. This model must
contain a substantial cognitive component and
must be further tested in undergraduate and
graduate courses.
The greatest challenge in both courses is the
change of learning methods, because the students
have been following courses in a traditional way
during their studies.
THE MODEL
The model contains, as a key ingredient, the
establishment of a permanent situation of challenge
among the students. The challenge is portrayed as
the solution of problems, in such a way that the
attitudes acquired by the students should maintain
a state of permanent self-motivation during the

* Accepted 2 October 2002.

754

A Self-Learning Environment based on the PBL Approach

755

evolution of the course. One of the most important
moments of the learning process occurs when the
students take over the course, because, from this
moment on, conditions are given to establish a selflearning environment. Afterwards, the student is
able to search real world problems and then to
understand, set, represent, and propose alternatives for their solution. Another important characteristic of the model is that the students improve
their capacities for the analysis, synthesis, abstraction, generalization, search for analogies, establishment of interrelationships between components
of the system, and increase the teamwork abilities.
The development of these capacities allows them,
at the same time, to increase their skills to state and
solve problems related to the course. A way of
measuring the success of the model is when the
students use meta-cognition principles to explain
examples by using the cognitive abilities they
acquired.
The model has the following main characteristics:

. Dynamic of the course: Four teams were formed,
each with 4 students. A restriction was placed:
there should be at least one computer systems
student, and no more than two, in each team.
The main challenge to the students was to
propose the solution of a real world problem
related with the automation of manufacturing
processes.

. The instructor presents concepts and sample
problems, and induces the students to pose
questions as an important part of the learning
process.
. He then analyzes a problem at several levels of
abstraction along two tracks: a bottom-up and a
top-down model.
. He now poses ill-structured problems to be
solved as part of the challenges [2].
. He then insists on the fact of understanding and
representing a problem.
. The students are required to search for real
world problems [3].
. The role of the teacher should gradually evolve
from a principal actor to a guide, or mentor;
otherwise a high risk of chaos can be created
resulting in an uncontrollable situation. [4, 5].
. The group must search for teamwork attitudes
based on problems of common interest.

Main topics to be covered: Distributed dynamic
problems; problem representations at several
levels of abstraction; planning models; offensive
and defensive team strategies; models of
distributed decision-making.

Learning scenarios within the course
Since graduate and undergraduate courses are
significantly dissimilar, we present them as scenarios, and proceed to compare the situations that
evolved in each one.
Undergraduate course: Integrated Manufacturing
Systems. Number of students: 16. Domain of
studies: Engineering of Computer Systems (7
students) and Industrial Engineering (9 students).
. General objective of the course: To apply concepts and techniques of manufacturing systems
to choice, implement, design and evaluate an
integrated manufacturing system; as well as to
learn how to use tools and instruments of a
computer-aided flexible manufacturing system.
. Main topics to be covered: the Concept of
Product Life Cycle; Concurrent Engineering;
Robotics; Group Technology; Numerical Control Machines; Programmable Logic Controllers; Manufacturing Planning and Control;
Integrated Computer-Aided Manufacturing.

Graduate course: Multi-Robotic Cooperative
Systems. Number of students: 7. Three advanced
master students and 5 Ph.D. students in Computer
Sciences.
General objective of the course: To apply problem
statement and solving of distributed cooperative
dynamic systems to a current research by the
instructor: A Robot-Soccer negotiation domain.
Another goal is to extrapolate the skills acquired in
problem statement and solving of Robot Soccer to
the distributed decision-making belonging to other
domains.

Dynamic of the course: Two teams were formed:
team 1 was composed of two master students and
one Ph.D. student. Team 2 was composed of three
Ph.D. students and one master student. The main
goal of team 1 was to develop defensive team
strategies. Group 2 was involved in improving
offensive team strategies reported in [6]. The
main challenge to the students was to develop
good algorithms so that they could participate in
two parallel events to be held in Korea in May
2002: the World Championship of Soccer-Robots
and the World Congress of Soccer-Robots.
Behavioral analysis
Figures 1 & 2 show curves representing the
behavior of the students during the course. The
vertical axis represents a sequence of steps to be
executed in order to reach phase 3, where the [key]
knowledge construction step is located. The Horizontal axis represents the time associated with the
degrees of self-learning. The intersection of the KCONST step with the Self-Learning Level IV is
seen as a knowledge constructivist zone, widely
known in cognitive science as the Zone of Proximal
Development (ZOPED) [7]. The choice of four
self-learning levels is merely arbitrary and corresponds to a division of the semester in four parts.
The phases are composed of a set of variables as
follows. Meaning of variables:
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

P-UND: Problem Understanding
P-STAT: Problem Statement
P-REP: Problem Representation
PLAN-EXE: Planning and Execution
FB-ANAL: Feed Back Analysis
META: Meta-Cognition
K-CONST: Knowledge Construction

756

F. Ramos and E. Espinosa

Fig. 1. Behavior of the graduate course.

The sets of variables related to the phases 1, 2 and
3 are as follows:
. Phase 1 (P-UND, P-STAT, P-REP): Analysis,
Synthesis, Abstraction, Inter-Relationships &

Characterization. Basic attitudes: Investigation
and teamwork.
. Phase 2 (PLAN-EXE, FB-ANAL): Analysis,
Synthesis, Abstraction, Generalization, InterRelationships, Characterization, Induction,

Fig. 2. Behavior of the undergraduate course.

A Self-Learning Environment based on the PBL Approach
Modeling & Analogy. Basic attitudes: Investigation and Teamwork.
. Phase 3 (META, K-CONST): Analysis,
Synthesis, Abstraction, Generalization, InterRelationships, Characterization, Induction,
Modeling, Analogy, Conceptualization &
Discovery. Basic attitudes: Investigation and
Teamwork.
The attitude of investigating is always present in
the students of the graduate program as an essential element of the curriculum. On the contrary, the
undergraduate students do not use necessary to
investigate during their studies.
GRADUATE COURSE
Figure 1 shows graphs that represent the behavior of groups 1 and 2. Based on these, it is
observed that the defensive group has taken more
time on phase 1 than the offensive group. There
was a concurrence of both groups, between periods
II and III, during the phase 2 (planning and
execution). However, the group capable of reaching the phase 3 during the period III was group 1.
Moreover, in spite that group 1 designed defensive
strategies, this group actually beat group 2 in
several matches, and also reached the zone of
meta-cognition and knowledge construction. This
can be explained as follows: group 1 has assumed a
deeper attitude of analysis. Consequently, they
built richer abstractions, inter-relationships and
characterizations than group 2. That is the
reason of the importance of phase 1. It can be
concluded that the deeper a team makes progress
in this phase, the stronger their bases to build and
discover knowledge are.
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE
In this course, four teams were assembled.
Figure 2 shows four curves that represent the
learning behavior of teams 1, 2, 3 and 4. There is
a coincidence with the graduate course during the
phase 1, because team 1 and team 4 have adopted
an attitude of making a deeper analysis, which
constituted the difference with teams 2 & 3. Due to
the behavior during phase 1, teams 1 & 4 could
reach phase 3. The leader of group 1 was a female
student of industrial engineering, whose main
attitude was to be very analytical. In team 4
there were two students, a female and a male,
both of them of very analytical nature. They
shared the leadership of the group. The female

757

was a student of industrial engineering, while the
male majored in computer engineering. The industrial engineering students tend to make structural
analysis during their studies. In these contexts the
representation of links between the components of
the system is very important. On the contrary, in
teams 3 and 4 the leaderships were computer
engineering majors. It is well known that the
students of this field are prone to code a program
without dedicating important efforts to a previous
analysis of the problem. We thus concluded that
the attitude related to analysis gives important
fruits that are reflected in phase 3, where metacognition and knowledge construction is situated.
The teacher should identify the leader of the
group because he is the more sensible to accept the
challenges. Nevertheless, this action should be
discrete. Otherwise, the other members of the
group can give up the interest to the course feeling
that they are not involved.
One of the main characteristics of the graduate
course concerns research as an important part of
the curriculum design. That is the reason why the
behavior represented by the curves is different and
none of the groups of the undergraduate course
reached the ZOPED. It is now evident that a
problem-solving context is useful to convert
declarative knowledge into useful skills and situated knowledge, which can be applied as successively approximate learning productions [8] that
can be eventually mapped with an appropriate
ontology such as time-analysis [9].
CONCLUSION
It has been proved that the teacher-centered
learning model does not allow the students to
develop cognitive abilities necessary to solve
problems. On the contrary, the student-centered
learning model is an alternative solution to this
problem, which is enriched by integrating the PBL
approach as mechanism to maintain the student in
a permanent challenge and consequently in a
constant motivation.
In this work, an analysis of the relationships
between cognitive abilities and the steps to solve
problems in order to monitor the behavior
assumed of the students during the evolution of
the course has been carried out. It has been shown
that an attitude to make a deep analysis of a
problem provides tools to understand and build
richer abstractions, interrelationships and characterizations to represent a problem, make plans,
build, and discover knowledge.

REFERENCES
1. Geroge Poyla, How to Solve It, Princeton University Press, USA (1965).
2. Shella Mierson, A problem based learning course in physiology for undegraduate and graduate
basic science students, Advances in Physiology Education, 20(1), December 1998, pp. S16±S27.

758

F. Ramos and E. Espinosa
3. Barbara Duch, Problems: A Key Factor in PBL. http://www.udel.edu/pbl/cte/spr96-phys-html.
4. Harold B. White, Dan Tries Problem-Based Learning: A Case Study. Reprinted from White, H. B. L.
Richlin (ed.) To Improve the Academy, Vol. 15 (pp. 75±91).
5. Russel Kenley, Problem based learning: within a traditional teaching environment, AUBEA
Conference, University of Technology Sydney, New South Wales.
6. M. de los Angeles Junco, F. Ramos-Quintana, Improving multi-agent coordination with an
approach based on a distributed rational decision-making model, Int. J. Knowledge-Based Intelligent
Engineering Systems, 5(4) October 2001, pp. 268±278.
7. Twomey Fosnot, Catherine, Constructivism: Theory, Perspectives & Practice, Teachers College
Press, USA (1996).
8. Wenger, Etienne, Artificial Intelligence and Tutoring Systems: Computational Approaches to the
Communication of Language, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., USA (1987).
9. Espinosa, Enrique; Ramos, Fernando, A Constructivist Learning Studio Based on Cognitive Time
Analysis, in Electronic Business & Education: Electronic Business and Education Recent Advances in
Internet Infrastructures, Wendy Chin, FreÂdeÂric Patricelli, Veljko Milutinovic Hardbound (eds),
Kluwer Academic Publishers, (2002) pp. 33±91.

Fernando Ramos Quintana holds a Ph.D. in Robotics from the UniversiteÂ de FrancheCompteÂ, France. Has been a CS professor at ITESM for 11 years. Has been honored 8
times as the highest-ranked academic in his field. His research interests include Robotics,
Multi-agent systems, and Education. Has directed several MS and Ph.D. thesis on
multi-agents and intelligent tutoring systems.

Enrique David Espinosa holds a BS in Computer Science from the University of Kansas, a
MS in Computer Systems from ITESM, and a Ph.D. Computer Science from ITESM.
Dr. Espinosa has been a CS professor for 12 years, and has taught several on-line and
distance courses through the Virtual University at ITESM. His research interests include
Intelligent Tutoring, Cognitive Science, and Distance Learning.

