ISSN No. 0976-5697
!
"!"
%

&

# $ $"
''' (

Blind Multi-Agent System for Department Teaching Schedule
Abdur Rashid Khan*

Sheikh Muhammad Saqib

Institute of Computing & Information Technology (ICIT),
Gomal University,
Dera Ismail Khan, Pakistan

Institute of Computing and Information Technology (ICIT),
Gomal University,
Dera Ismail Khan, Pakistan
saqibsheikh4@hotmail.com

rashidkh08@yahoo.com

Abstract: This research paper represents a multi-agent system, which have four Agents named as Knowledge Acquisition Agent, Attendance Agent,
Decision Making Agent and Communication Agent that works together to that automatically gets inputs, manipulates the data, prepares timetable as
well as keeps the record of students’ attendance and makes communication with its environment in an automatic fashion through sensors. All the
agents work like human agents, which is one of the basic aims of computer technology. This work depicts an idea to integrate the Human Expertise,
Information as well as the Biometric Technologies to solve real world problems. Feedback may be used as a learning element in the processing of the
Multi-agent system. Snapshots (i.e., time table preparation, Attendance records, decision about absenteeism etc) depict how the various results are
being provided by this multi-agent system to help human. This system can easily be implemented through adaptation of Biometric Technology and
may also be used for employees’ attendance record as well as for security purposes, in future research.
Keywords: Agent, multi-agent system, biometrics technology and sensors

I. INTRODUCTION
Students’ absenteeism is a major concern for
educators at institutions of higher learning. We observed that
absences are just like a termite for students, which can
demolish him from his education. Biometric is the most secure
and convenient authentication tool. It can not be borrowed,
stolen, or forgotten and forging one is practically impossible.
Biometrics measures individual's unique physical or behavioral
characteristics to recognize or authenticate their identity.
Common physical biometrics includes fingerprints, hand or
palm geometry, retina, iris, and facial characteristics.
Behavioral characters characteristics include signature, voice,
keystroke pattern, and gait. Of this class of biometrics,
technologies for signature and voice are the most developed
[1]. Absenteeism disturbs the dynamic teaching-learning
environment and adversely affects the overall well-being of
classes [2]. In a survey of the impact of attendance on student
classroom success made by Robert M. Schmidt, the author
measured the impact of time commitments by students to
various course activities on the students' performance in the
given class [3]. Education system is mainly based upon
keeping strict control over the presence of the students. While,
right information at the right time is only possible through real
time computer processing. Such software is required which
may provide facilities both for feedback as well as feed
forward controlling strategies. Mostly, a teacher teaches many
classes daily, where there are more than 40 students in each
class. Hence it is very difficult for a teacher to manage
attendance of each class individually and prepare a time table
for numerous subjects and a large number of teachers as well.
This research paper presents a multi-agent system to give a
concept of making an agent device which can automatically
© 2010, IJARCS All Rights Reserved

acquire knowledge about courses, teachers’ specialties,
evaluate attendance of each student and prepare a time table for
allocation of subjects. This works aims to develop a multiagent system that can automatically acquire knowledge from its
environment, process data, produces results and communicate
back with its environment. The summarized form of objectives
of this work is: • To develop a multi-agent system that may work like a
human’s team.
• To prepare a guideline to utilize both Computer and
Biometric technologies in a useful form.
• To provide a pedagogical device to help students and
researchers to use the useful techniques and
technologies in research and development.
• To provide a way of further research to expand this
work for security and staff management.
Information is acquired from external environment through
these sub-agents, are processed and communicated back to the
users automatically. This work is presently limited just to a
conceptual acquisition and processing of information, which
will be enhanced in the future through implementation of
biometric devices along with inclusion of methodology how to
learn from its experience through using suitable technique(s) of
learning.
II. CONCEPTUAL DESIGN
The working components of this multi-agent system
can be seen through the following diagram. Fig 1 shows the
main components, interactions among them as well as with the
environment. The main components of this multi-agent system
are: Knowledge Acquisition Agent, Attendance Agent,
1

Abdur Rashid Khan et al, International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science, 2 (2), Mar-Apr, 2011,1-5

Decision Making Agent, Knowledge Base and Communication
Agent. The Knowledge Acquisition Agent acquires knowledge
from the users directly and/or through biometric technologies,
prepares time table and allocation of courses for the session.
This agent learns from its feed back or experience and utilizes
this knowledge effectively. The Attendance Agent keeps the
record of students’ attendance, gives details about absentees of
the students and announcement of the class timings. The

Study Plan

Attendance Agent

Maintains records
of: daily
attendance, class
timings, and
students’
absentees

Decision Making Agent is responsible for making decisions
about the rules implementations and punishment/warnings.
Knowledge Base (KB) stores knowledge about all the functions
of this system. The Communication Agent works as a liaison
agent between the main system and the system users, like;
Students, Teachers, Academic Section, Exam Section,
Administration etc.

Request for
Teachers, Students,
Courses

Knowledge Acquisition
Agent

E
N
V
I
R
O
N
M
E
N
T

Prepares
Time Table
and
Allocating
Courses

Knowledge
Base

Attendance details
Decisions about students’
warning, struck off, fines,
re-admissions, pay bills

Decision Making Agent

Results and
Recommendation
s

Decisions
Communication Agent

Human User,
Biometric
devices

Feed back

Students
Teachers
Academic
section
Exam section
Pay section

Figure.1 Main Components of the Multi-Agent System

III. RESULTS & DISCUSSIONS
As mentioned previously, the proposed Multi Agent
environment consists of three agents, which has a mechanism
of acquiring knowledge from its environment and learns from
its experience as well. The logical as well as working activities
of all these agents are being described in the following
paragraphs.

This Sub-Agent acquires knowledge and has the learning
capabilities from its environment. It prepares time table for all
classes and also allocate courses with the help of its past
experience through using its learning mechanism. This agent
gets knowledge from its environment; local and foreign
education institutions, all the sections of the institute, and other
users. Fig 2 depicts the internal working and communication of
this agent with the other coordinating agents.

A. Knowledge Acquisition Agent
Human
Agent

Students, Teachers and
Courses records
Provides Info
Learning

Time Table

Knowledge Acquisition Agent

KB

Course Allocation

Figure.2 The Knowledge Acquisition Agent
© 2010, IJARCS All Rights Reserved

2

Abdur Rashid Khan et al, International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science, 2 (2), Mar-Apr, 2011,1-5

Inputs include; information about programs, courses,
students, teachers etc along with the feedback of the system
is acquired through Keyboard for the time being. Processing
of this agent includes; preparing the time table and courses
allocation to various teachers according to their specialties and
expertise. Control Mechanism is to distribute the courses
using specified criteria without confliction in time table.
Objectives are to produce and communicate the time table, and
courses allocation. While, its Environment consists of;
department, students, teachers, input devices, knowledge base
and other co-partner agents of the Multi-agent System. See the
pseudo code for this agent shown through Table 2.
Table.1Pseudo Code for Knowledge Acquisition Agent
i) Input From Environment.
If AlreadyExistStudentRecord() then Return

Figure.4 Programs Entries

Fig 5 gives details about courses being offered in a specific
program in the relevant term.

Stop
Else: Insert in to data base
ii) Input for Courses:
Get(Courses for all Programs)
iii) Processing:
SettingTimeTable()
iv) Generate reports.
TimeTableNoticeBoard()
TechersAllocatedCourses()

Data Entries/Input Forms: Following snapshots are the input
entries of this agent, which are based upon the knowledge
about programs, courses, students, teachers, and its feedback.
Following layouts will be used for inputs about Students,
Teachers and Course information. Fig 3 depicts the inputs,
which shows the code, designation, remuneration details etc.

Figure.5 Courses Entries

Students’ and teachers’ information entries are being shown
through Fig 6 and Fig 7 respectively, as given below.

Figure.3 Teachers’ Remuneration

Fig 4 shows how entries can be made about the programs
offered, their codes, and relevant terms.

© 2010, IJARCS All Rights Reserved

Figure.6 Students’ Profile

3

Abdur Rashid Khan et al, International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science, 2 (2), Mar-Apr, 2011,1-5

Table.2 Pseudo Code for Attendance Agent
i) Input from 1st Agent.
Get

Inputs

about_time_

table

and

teachers_with-courses
ii) Processing:
ClassAnnouncement()
CapturingTime()
TakingAttendence()
iii) Irregularity Report
Apply

rules_of_attendance

and

Generate_the_report
Else:

Figure.8 Teachers’ Profile

Return Stop

iv) Out Put:
Generate Attendance_Report

Outputs of this agent include: Courses Allocation and Time
Table as shown through Fig 8 and Fig 9 below.
Fig 10 represents the daily attendance report being produced
by the Attendance Agent.

Figure.9 Courses Allocation

Time table being produced by the Knowledge Acquisition
Agent is shown through Fig 9 as below.

Figure.11 Daily Attendance Report

C.

Figure.10 Time Table

B.

Attendance Agent
This agent has communication with Knowledge base,
Knowledge Acquisition and Decision making Agents. It
announces class timings, keeps record of attendance. This
agent is responsible for class timings, along with informing
students about their absentees.
© 2010, IJARCS All Rights Reserved

Decision Making Agent
This agent takes output of Attendance Agent as input
and used to generate the monthly report for each student. It
takes care for the rules and regulations about attendance and
acts accordingly. Checking their attendance either he will be
worn, struck off or cancel the admission of a student. At the
end of semester this agent generates the teachers’ bill if the
classes are evening or self finance based.
Table.3 Pseudo Code for Decision Making Agent

4

Abdur Rashid Khan et al, International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science, 2 (2), Mar-Apr, 2011,1-5
i)

Input

Figure.12 All students Struck off Report

Get(students_ attendance from Attendance_agent)
ii)

Warning Report

If(Month=1)
If(attendance<50%)
Generate Warning_report
iii)

Struck Off Report

If(Month=2)
If(attendance<60%)
Generate Struck_off_Report
iv)

Cancel Admission Report

If(Month=3)
If(attendance<75%)
Generate Cancel_admission_report
v)

Generate Teacher Bills

If(Classes_Self_Finance or Evening_Schedule)
Then

Figure.13 Student’s Parent Letter

Similarly, teachers; bill of payment being verified by the
internal committee is shown in the Fig 13 as below.

Generate Report_For_Bill.

Sample consolidated struck off report, individual
students’ report and struck off information letter to students’
parents can be seen through Fig 11, Fig 12 and Fig 13 as given
below.

Figure.11 Consolidated Struck off Report for Notice Board

Figure.14 Teachers’ Bill of Payment

D.

Communication Agent
This agent makes communication with the students,
their parents and various sections of the university, like;
Academic section, Exam Section, Pay Section, and
Administration. The output information (i.e. warning, struck
off, fines, termination, etc) are displayed over the notice board,
university website and through letters. These results become a
feedback to the Knowledge Management Agent to learn from
the working experience of this multi-agent system.
IV. CONCLUSION
Proposed MAS will enhance the teacher’s efficiency
by making the attendance management process easy, user
friendly and automatic. This multi-agent system depicts an idea
to integrate the human expertise, Information Technology and
Biometric Technology in solving our real world problem. This
system is well suited for any teaching environment for

© 2010, IJARCS All Rights Reserved

5

Abdur Rashid Khan et al, International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science, 2 (2), Mar-Apr, 2011,1-5

attendance, time table preparation and course allocation and
replaces dedicated staff. It is educational version, so it can be
used by teachers and institutions free of cost.
V. REFERENCES
[1]. http://www.peterindia.net/BiometricsView.html

© 2010, IJARCS All Rights Reserved

[2].Foltz, John. Evaluation of factors influencing student class
attendance and
performance, American Journal of
Agricultural Economics, 1996
http://www.allbusiness.com/north-america/unitedstates/590295-1.html
[3]. A Study in Student Time Allocation ", AMERICAN
ECONOMIC REVIEW, May, 1983, pp. 23-28).
http://www.mnsu.edu/cetl/teachingresources/articles/class
attendance.html

6

