ISSN No. 0976-5697
!
"!"
%

&

# $ $"
''' (

Reengineering of the Tollgate Process Management based on the Financing of Road Infrastructure in
Developing Countries
Roger Atsa Etoundi*

Tchatchouang Kepche Stéphanie

Department of Computer Science
Faculty of Science
University of Yaounde I
roger.atsa@uy1.uninet.cm

Department of Computer Science
Faculty of Science
University of Yaounde I
tkepch2006@yahoo.fr

__________________________________________________________________________________________________
Abstract: To manage its road assets, the Republic of Cameroon opted for the creation of tollgates on tarred roads to finance the road sector because
of the limitation of public funds which is a general problem in developing countries. The funds collected should be used to maintain existing roads
and create others. After several years of prosperity during which revenue from tollgates were significant, there came a point from where a significant
drop in tollgate revenue was experienced despite the creation of new tollgates and the increase number of vehicles. This drop in revenue is largely
due to poor monitoring of various operations related to the management of the different tollgates which is systematically manual. This type of
processing has encouraged all sorts of fraud, resulting to the drastic drop in revenue. In order to boost the revenue related to the management of
tollgates, we handle this problem as one of engineering. After defining salient concepts suitable in representing a tollgate, we build in an incremental
manner a model for an efficient management of tollgates based on the use of ICT.
Keywords: Tollgate Management, Revenue Security, Business Process Reengineering, Quality of Service.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Most developing countries depend on traditional
sources for financing and investing on roads. As a result the
construction resources and maintenance of roads is often
inadequate and unsustainable. To meet this challenge,
countries have implemented various initiatives such as the
establishment of road toll systems with an efficiency of
funding. Moreover, there is a general lack of maintenance
funds in almost all countries in the developing world [12].
Most government allocations for maintenance of roads remain
well below the amounts necessary for the conservation
network. In many countries operating budgets have declined to
the point where they barely cover staff costs, administration
and some emergency repairs. There is little for maintenance.
In the past, international agencies gave their assistance insofar
as they have essentially supported the investment budgets, but
now they are no longer willing to finance rehabilitation
projects without credible arrangements for road maintenance
[13,14]. The insufficiency of financial resources to maintain
existing roads and create more roads is a real impediment on
development of developing countries. Moreover, the poor
infrastructures in these countries have direct and indirect
important impact on humans such as accessibility to health
care centers and a real hindrance to the development of
different sectors that depend on it. Although not explicitly
outlined in the Millennium Development Goals (with the
notable exception of access to water and sanitation),
infrastructure development undoubtably contributes to their
achievement. For these reasons, the cost of transport is
particularly high in these countries, averaging 14% of the
value of exports compared to 8.6% for all developing
© 2010, IJARCS All Rights Reserved

countries. It even reached 50% on average in the 15
landlocked countries in these countries. Only 27.6% of 2
million kilometers of roads are paved in Africa generally, a
figure that drops to 19% for Sub Sahara African countries,
compared to 27% in Latin America and 43% in South Asia
[15]. Development and modernization of infrastructure in
Africa to achieve the MDGs by 2015 would require substantial
investment among, according to the World Bank, about $ 40
billion per year over the decade 2005/2015 (9% of GDP)
Including $ 22 to 24 billion investment in new infrastructure
and $ 17 billion for maintenance of existing infrastructure
[16]. Public resources alone will not suffice to bridge the
considerable gap that exists between the infrastructure
available and the needs of these countries’ population. For
example, it is estimated that on average, African countries
would be able to maintain less than half of their national road
networks, if they were counting on their own budgetary
resources. Consequently, many African countries have sought
to involve the private sector in development and infrastructure
management.
Roads constitute a prior medium to any economic
development in developing countires. It can generate funds for
its development by involving road users. That is why many
developing countries are making substantial investments in
equipping them with road infrastructures [3] that facilitates
meeting the defined objective. Cameroon is not left behind in
this new deal. Cameroon now has more than 4054 km of
tarred roads as compared to 2,796 km in 1986 [5, 6]. Faced
with the ever increasing need of road infrastructure due to the
requirement of adapting the road sector to the development of
the country, the state was in difficulty to achieve the goals set
in maintaining existing roads and creating new ones. These
difficulties worsened with the economic crisis that struck the
49

Roger Atsa Etoundi et al, International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science, 2 (2), Mar-Apr, 2011, 49-56

world. The state had to find solutions to meet the requirements
in the road sector. Also, during 1992/1993 fiscal year, the
associated finance law instituted the tollgates which aim is to
ensure the recovery of maintenance charges and renewal of
road infrastructure by road users; to increase State budgetary
resources, and to meet up conditions of competition between
different modes of transport.
Prime Ministerial decree No. 93/034 of 07 January 1993
from the Head of Government defines the modalities of the
creation of tollgates on certain tarred roads of the national
road network while the decision No. 003/A/MINAT of
February 18, 1993 created 35 checkpoints which become
operational from 30 November 1993. This number increased
from 35 at the beginning to 45 today due to the construction of
new roads.
In 2005, after twelve years of management of tollgates
around the country, it has been realized that among the tarred
roads, only 26% were maintained and were in good state,
while the rest were just mediocre or bad and require
immediate service. Moreover, it has also been established that
the road density amounted to about 3Km per 1000 inhabitants
and 100 km for 1000km2 against an African average of 4.2 km
for 100km2 [6]. Instead of improving its road infrastructure
based on the payment of fees by road users, this sector
collapses for lack of funds to maintain existing roads. To
remedy this state of affairs, maintenance and construction of
road networks in Cameroon was estimated at approximately
$189 million per year, development partners allocate annually
to the State of Cameroon approximately $100 million; the
remainder is on the responsibility of the state and is distributed
such that the tollgates should provide $12.7 million
approximately from 2006 with an annual increase aimed to
reach $17, 8 million by 2012 [5]. But this goal was not
achieved after the evaluation done in 2009, tollgates revenue
continues to decline while road users increase significantly.
Indeed, according to the cabinet meeting report of 25 June
2009, the government branded the drop in tollgate revenue
estimating over $7.8 million average annual deficit between
2003 and 2007 [2]. Concerning the causes of this decline,
speculations diverge. At the National road council, the
structure in charge to reflect on ways and means for a
harmonious development and maintenance of national road
network, members point out the mismanagement of the road
revenue securing Program which was established in October
2005 with aim to secure associated revenues and to go against
the mismanagement of tollgates [1]. Faced with this situation,
the Head of Government called for further efforts to
streamline the income of the tollgates in the loop made up of
roads linking the capital Yaounde to Douala and Bafoussam.
Experts say the tollgates installed on these loop provide about
80% of road toll funds. Moreover, the national road council
also points out that the manual process was subject to a lot of
suspicions; the government therefore has suggested the urgent
automation of tollgates, along with the necessary reform of the
Road Fund [2].
To guide the Cameroon Government in its efforts to
automate the management of tollgates, we propose a model
based approach based on the business processes requirement
[10, 11] for an efficient management of the income of tollgates
© 2010, IJARCS All Rights Reserved

in Cameroon. It involves creating conditions for continuous
improvement of work by the actors themselves to reduce
delays and errors in order to optimize the performance in
building and maintaining roads [7]. For this goal, the quality
of service [8, 9] in this sector will significantly be ameliorated.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2
will present the tollgate system as it currently operates in
Cameroon and the limitations of this system. In Section 3, we
shall propose a solution to secure revenue. In Section 4 we
shall propose an implementation of the prototype while
section 5 concludes and prospects.
II.

THE CURRENT SYSTEM

In this section, we shall present the current management
approach of tollgates in Cameroon. This revolves around:
tollgate payment modalities, the supply of tickets tollgate to be
distributed to road users after payment for any eventual
verification, the organization of work at each tollgate,
monitoring and evaluation of tollgates, the operational
assessment of tollgates, and fraud observed in this sector.
A. Modalities of payment of tolls and subscription
Tarred roads of the national road network comprise one or
more toll checkpoints. These routes and the number of toll
points on each are fixed by decree of the Minister of
Transport. The crossing of any toll point is subject to the
purchase and presentation of a ticket worth $1.1 issued by the
Minister of Finance. This ticket must be stamped.
However, subscription packages at reduced rates for a
route not going beyond a toll checkpoint may be granted to
users who have their homes or workplaces in the vicinity of an
tarred toll road for a route that does not go beyond a toll
station: $ 11.11per month per vehicle, for vehicles of local
public services on missions around their domain of
competence: $11.11 per year per toll station per vehicle, for at
most fifteen (15) seat public transport vehicles frequently used
for activities around a single toll gate: $ 44.44 per month per
vehicle. A subscriber card is purchased from the treasury to
which the toll gate concerned is attached. However for public
services, this card can be issued by the competent Paymaster
General of that territorial jurisdiction.
Failure to present a ticket or a valid subscriber card after
crossing a tollgate is punishable by a fine equivalent to six
times the price of a toll. The fine is paid at the tollgate in
exchange of tickets of equal value to the amount of the fine.
Authorized users toll are free. These are pedestrians, twowheeled vehicles, ambulances, vehicles participating in law
enforcement with number plates of the armed forces, the
national gendarmerie and national security.
B. Access to Tickets
The Director of the Budget is the depository accountant of
toll tickets and subscriber cards. He is responsible for the
safekeeping of these tickets and the supply of major accounts
office. His responsibility extends to transactions carried out by
agents under his command. In case of loss or theft of tickets,
50

Roger Atsa Etoundi et al, International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science, 2 (2), Mar-Apr, 2011, 49-56

he cannot be discharge of that responsibility until the
production of required regulatory justifications. The
Paymaster General is supplied by the Director Budget and in
turn supplies secondary accounts offices in their area of
competence. The officials of the said accounts offices are
bound to keep auxiliary account records and shall send
monthly statements of their sales to the attached Paymaster, as
well as the Directors of the Budget and Treasury. The
proceeds of the sales are deposited at the state budget and final
Budget allocation specified clearly at the time of
establishment of the receipt. The Directors of the budget and
the Treasury shall each carry out periodic verification of the
regularity of sales and compliance of tickets in service.
C. Work organization
The checkpoint operates 24 hours on 24 under the care of
three teams each consisting of six (6) persons. However, the
number of agents appointed to the toll stations may be reduced
in certain gate due to the amount of traffic. In case of staff
insufficiency in one from the above government service, the
local committee may seek the services of agents of other
territorially represented government services after a favorable
opinion from the competent senior staff.
Civilian personnel in service at the tollgates are appointed
by order of the Governor on proposal of local representatives
of the Ministry of Finance and Transport as appropriate.
Personnel under the forces of law and order are by their
competent commanding officer, at the request of the
Governor.
The necessary hardware for the normal functioning of a
tollgate is made for by the Transportation Authority; these
include records and bags in which counterfoil-book of toll
tickets are stored. A joint team ensures continuous control of
tollgates. It is composed of a representative from the
Divisional finances control (member) and a representative
from the competent Provincial transport service.
Each team works continuously for 24 hours, from 8:00 to
8:00 the next morning. The whole team starts work at 07:30
am and shall sign out and authenticate tickets before relieve of
the next team. It returns to duty 48 hours later. The cashier of
the team must have a quantity of tickets worth more than the
daily norm of the gate. Under the supervision of the team
leader, he shares these tickets amongst sales agents present
and records in the station register, the serial numbers of tickets
issued to each of them. Each agent returns unsold tickets to the
cashier who shall return them at the same time with the
income of the day to the attached accounts office.
A daily income evaluation sheet, kept by the cashier and
under the supervision of the team leader, is made available to
each team. This form must imperatively indicate clearly the
number of tickets sold by each agent as well as his signature to
attest the exactitude of the amount of his receipts of the day.
The sales of each agent in a team must be fully recorded in the
register at the toll gate and deposited over to the cashier of the
attached accounts office at the end of work in exchange of a
receipt duly discharged. Upon resumption of service, the team
leader has the records the number of the said receipt in the
register of the station. In case of non presentation of this
© 2010, IJARCS All Rights Reserved

receipt by the cashier, the team leader informs the president of
the local committee who takes precautionary measures.
D. Monitoring and Evaluation of agents
The toll gate is managed by an inter-ministerial operations
monitoring committee, which is responsible for monitoring
and coordinating the workflow of toll gates on the national
territory. As such, it is particularly in charge of: (1) adopting
strategies, action plans and corrective measures developed by
the competent executive organs, (2) taking all necessary steps
to start, the implementation and monitoring of the
implementation of activities of toll gates on the national
territory, (3) evaluating current toll gate activities and propose
any appropriate corrective action, (4) adopting technical
standards for equipment and materials at toll gates, on the
basis of proposals from relevant technical services; (5)
proposing to the Minister of Public Works and that in charge
of finance, toll gates management modes, (6) producing toll
gate statistical data, on the basis of documents produced by the
competent technical services, (7 ) monitoring and supervise
the management of toll gates. Besides the inter-ministerial
committee, local committees for monitoring the operations of
toll gates were introduced in order to carry out monthly
assessment of toll gates in accordance with assessment guide
prepared for this purpose. Despite all these measures set by
text putting in place monitoring and management organs for
toll gates in Cameroon, there is a failure to take into account
all requirements for the proper management of those toll gates.
E. The Fleet vehicle
Since the mid-90s, the fleet vehicle has grown steadily,
helped by the implementation of policies of trade
liberalization and the massive importation of used vehicles
which account for more than half of imported vehicles. This
park has risen by nearly 210,000 vehicles in 2000 to
approximately 313,000 vehicles in 2005, representing an
average annual increase of 8.30%. It is divided into 82% of
light vehicles and 18% heavy vehicles. The rate of car
ownership, one of the highest in the region is about 14 per
1000 inhabitants [5,6]. According to the information received
from the ministry of transport dealing with the delivery of cars
license, the number of vehicles recorded from the year 1996 to
the year 2008 is given by the following:

Figure.1 curve of fleet vehicle evolution

51

Roger Atsa Etoundi et al, International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science, 2 (2), Mar-Apr, 2011, 49-56

Based on these data, the number of vehicles has increased
within the years. However, the revenue obtained from the
management of tollgates does not follow this evolution
although these vehicles used the roads where tollgates are
deployed.
F. Tollgate functioning Assessment
The histogram below shows the revenue trend from
the tollgates from the years 1995 to 2007:

On the basis of statistical data above, the fraud rate is
estimated at about 73%. Following an analysis of the
operation described above, we can identify two reasons for
this state of affairs (1) the inability to know the exact number
of vehicles passing through a given tollgate. This implies that
fraud of all kinds can be arranged at the toll gate from an
agreement between users and road tollgate personnel (i) cash
payment that will not be counted. The government spoke of
the existence of parallel tickets, the sale of tickets is not
recorded, (ii) reuse of denatured tickets that are dispatched to
distracted users as pointed out by “Cameroon Tribune” in its
issue of July 10, 2009 publication (iii) Non-payment of tolls
due to relations of friendship and brotherhood between
tollgate personnel and road users, (2) manual management of
tollgates that does not facilitate the monitoring, evaluation and
traceability of all operations.
III. REENGINEERING OF TOLLGATES PROCESS
FOR BETTER MANAGEMENT

Figure.2 histogram tollgate revenues from 1995 to 2007

In total, over $ 12.7 million was collected within this
period. In general, there is a trend of rising road tollgate
revenue since its establishment, which increased from less
than $ 4 500 000 in 1993-1994 to more than $ 10 million in
2006, but we cannot help noticing a decline of more than 10%
between 2005 and 2006 accelerated in 2007. The communiqué
endorsed by the cabinet meeting of June 25, 2009 notes that
the toll road no longer gives the full measure of its ability. The
government says it has received less than 62% of what users
should pay [1]. A very high rate of fraud and questionable
management justify the loss in revenue.
G. Tollgate frauds
The tollgate is
by the laws that are readapted on
the field according to the context. From these laws are defined
a set of activities which should be carried out in order to make
sure that the process is implemented as defined. Among these
activities is the control process which allows to really verify
what is done on the field. A control carried out in 1999 as part
of the simplification and harmonization study of road tax in
Cameroon around 4 tollgates and by linear interpolation on all
the tollgates in activity revealed a fraud rate of 50% [5].
Meanwhile, an investigation by an inter-ministerial committee
headed by the Ministry of Transport has recorded the
following data based on one working day in all the tollgates:
Average
taxable
(number of cars)

traffic

31 137

The electronic counter consists of a card reader and a cash
payment device. Each detected vehicle is automatically
registered in the database as soon as the latter finds itself at the
electronic counter. The entry barrier is characterized by an
electronic bar that is either open or closed, and a detector of
cars in the queue. The entry opens automatically when a car is
detected in the queue and the electronic counter is free. For a
good understanding of our model, we shall present in an
incremental manner the various concepts discussed above.
A.User
In this work, we consider as user any vehicle that uses a
toll route on which we have installed a tollgate. The current
legislation recognizes as user: security vehicles, administrative
vehicles, ambulances and private vehicles. This legislation
stipulates that only private vehicles should pay the toll. Bypass routes have been built specifically to allow the passage of
road users on two wheels without toll payment, such a user is
not taken into account in this work. A user is characterized by
his type that is either public or private. Formally, a user U is
defined by <Type, ID> where ID represents the identity of the
user Type denotes the type associated to the user (private and
public). In general, the identifier of a user actually represents
the license plate number attached to each vehicle.
B. Barrier

Estimated revenue

$34250.7

Actual revenue

$8888.9

deficit

$25361.8

© 2010, IJARCS All Rights Reserved

To secure the revenue from tollgate, in this section, we
define the salient concepts that will be used in order to build
the required model. For this, we shall consider that a tollgate
consists of a set of toll payment zones. Each zone is
characterized by a sense of traffic that is either up or down,
two barriers (an inlet and a outlet), an electronic counter, a
waiting space where road users are positioned when the
electronic counter is under used.

The barriers are used to protect the electronic counter such
that only one user at most can be inside this critical point of
the tollgate at any given time. The barrier is characterized by
52

Roger Atsa Etoundi et al, International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science, 2 (2), Mar-Apr, 2011, 49-56

its state (open or close), formally a barrier is defined by I=
<open, close> where open and close predicates are defined as
follows:
Open: I
Boolean, Close: I
Boolean. So when i denotes a
barrier, open (i) = true if the barrier i is open and open (i) =
false otherwise. Similarly, close (i) = true if i is closed and
close (i) = false otherwise. Every moment, close (i) open (i).
In other words, a barrier is either open or closed.

•

Lemma: Given an electronic counter g of a toll gate, at any
time t, the income of g is proportional to the number of private
users haven crossed that electronic counter.
Thus,

Fd ( g , t ) = pu ( g , t ) × tx

C. Electronic counter
An Electronic counter consists of a card reader, a device
for cash payment and possibly a ticket distributor. When a
user arrives at the electronic counter, he inserts his card into
the card reader, the card validity is checked, if the test is good,
the card is returned to the user and payment is completed, or
he introduces a coin in the equipment for this purpose, a check
is done to see if the coin corresponds to $1, 1, if yes, the coins
are registered and payment completed. The mode of payment
is stored in the database; administrative vehicles and
ambulances which are toll free have a special card issued on
mission so that it is associated with the service vehicle and
duration of mission so that it is used only for service purpose.
Thanks to this card as they can cross through as subscribed
user. Formally we can define an Electronic counter as follows:
< Int, Exit, Wt, usr, fd, Nbv, pu> where
Int and Exit represent the inlet and the outlet respectivelty.
Wt is a test that determines if a user is waiting at the
entrance of an electronic counter. This test shall be used to
synchronize the opening of barriers. Thus, when gt denotes
any electronic counter, wt ( g , t ) = false when no user is

The following properties provide constraints for
opening and closing of barriers.
Property 1: The first barrier goes to state open when there is a
waiting vehicle and the electronic counter is not busy.
Let
g
be
an
electronic
counter,

open ( Int ( g ) ) ⇔ wt ( g ) = true ∧ usr ( g , now ) =⊥
Property 2: The first barrier is in the state close if no user is
waiting, or if the electronic counter is busy. Thus if g is an
electronic counter then the following constraint is satisfied

close( Int ( g )) ⇔ ( wt ( g ) = false ∨ usr ( g , now) ≠⊥ )
Property 3: The second barrier closes up when the user at the
electronic counter has completed the payment. Thus, let g be
an electronic counter,
fd( g,now) = fd( g,now−∆t) +tx∨type(usr(g,now) = private open( exit ( g) )
Property 4: The second exit closes up when the user is out.
Thus, if g is an electronic counter we have

(usr ( g , now ) =⊥)

waiting.
usr identifies the user if the electronic counter is occupied,
from this fact, usr(gt,dt) is the user who was identified at the
electronic counter gt on the date dt.
• fd is a function that determines at any time the
income rt at the electronic counter gt at a given date
dt with the constraint fd(gt,dt)=rt. The income is
incremented by the tolls rate each time a private user
goes through the electronic counter. Thus, when g is
an electronic counter that has just been crossed by a
private user over a spent time
∆t for payment
transactions then fd ( g , t + ∆t ) = fd ( g , t ) + tx
•

Pu is a function that determines the number of private
users who transited through a toll gate and actually
paid the toll. Thus, when gt denote an electronic
counter, if type(usr(gt,t))=public, then Pu(gt, t+t)=
Pu(gt,t)+1

where tx represents the toll.
The function Nbv returns the number of cars that
have crossed an electronic counter after a given date.
The number of vehicles is increased by one at each
transit. Thus, when g is an electronic counter that has
just been traversed by a user who took a time ∆t for
payment transactions, the following constraint will be
satisfied

Nbv ( g , t + ∆t ) = Nbv ( g , t ) + 1
© 2010, IJARCS All Rights Reserved

close ( Exit ( g ) )

Axiom 1:
From modeling, there is always at most one user at a particular
time at the electronic counter.
Axiom 2:
When the outlet is closed, the inlet opens automatically if
there are users on hold.
D. Toll gate
A tollgate consists of two branches, one in each direction
of vehicle traffic (It is assumed that each road has one lane in
each direction). Formally a tollgate is a 5-tuple <G1, G2, fdT,
NbvT,puT> Where:
G1, G2 are the electronic counter one on each direction.
fdT returns the total revenue of the tollgate which is the
sum of revenues from its two electronic counters. So if p is a
tollgate its recipe on the date t is given by fdT (p, t) = fd (G1
(p), t) + fd (G2 (p), t)
Similarly, the total number of cars having crossed the
tollgate p on date t is NbvT(p,t)=Nbv(G1(p),t)+Nbv(G2(p),t)
puT

53

Roger Atsa Etoundi et al, International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science, 2 (2), Mar-Apr, 2011, 49-56

puT(p,t)=pu(G1(p),t)+pu(G2(p),t)
E. Toll zone
It is a set of toll gates put together for a common
management. A toll zone is characterized by a set of toll gate,
total revenue which corresponds to the sum of revenues from
different toll gate of the zone, the number of vehicles and the
number of private users who crossed the zone. Formally,
Zone= ( P, Rp, Vp, Pp ) with P = {p| p Peage}: a set of toll
gates; Rp a function that determines the revenue generated in
the
zone
z
at
a
given
date
t
Rp ( z, t ) =
fdT ( p , t ) ;
p∈ P ( Z

)

Vp, a function that determines the number of vehicles that
crossed a toll gate of the toll zone; Thus the number of
vehicles which cross a zone z at a given date is given by
Vp ( z , t ) =
NbvT ( p, t ) ;
p∈P ( z )

Pp is the function that determines the number of private
vehicles that have crossed a toll zone:

Pp ( z , t ) =

p∈P ( z )

PuT ( p, t ) ;

From a toll zone, we can zoom into a given tollgate in
order to obtain its information.
F. Virtual Tollgate
The virtual toll gate presents an overview of all tollgates
that have been created around the country. It is characterized
by: the set of toll zones, global revenue, the number of
vehicles passing through toll gates and the number of private
vehicles crossing the tollgates. Formally, a virtual tollgate is
defined by < Z, RT, VT, PT> where: Z = {z| z Zone} a set
of zones;
RT a function that determines the revenue generated for
the entire toll gates on a given date. Thus if w is the virtual toll
gate, the revenue on a date t is

RT ( w, t ) =

z∈Z ( w )

Rp ( z , t ) ,

VT the function that determines the total number of cars
that pass through the different toll zones in Cameroon. We
have VT ( w, t ) =
Vp ( z , t ) ,
z∈Z ( w )

PT the function that determines the number of private
vehicles crossing the different toll zones.
We
have PT ( w, t ) =
,
Pp ( z , t )
z∈Z ( w )

From the virtual toll gate, you can zoom into a zone to
obtain information about this zone.
IV.

PROTOTYPE IMPLEMENTATION

A. Specifications
© 2010, IJARCS All Rights Reserved

To implement the proposed solution, roads at toll gates
should be constructed first, so as to have at least two lanes in
each direction: one lane for pedestrians and two-wheeled
vehicles and at least one lane for motorists traveling in this
direction. The toll gate should also be equipped with a system
comprising the following elements: (1) two automatic barriers
between which is the secure zone that contains the electronic
counter reserved for the payment transaction, each barrier has
a microcontroller to ensure that not more than a car is in the
electronic counter at given time. (2) Sensors at each barrier to
determine the presence of a vehicle at the entrance to a toll
gate. When a vehicle is within range of the sensor field, its
registration number is read and stored in the database. (3) A
computerized card for collection. (4), a subscriber cards
control system.
Passing through a tollgate is described by the following
algorithm:
Cross algorithm ()
Begin
Detection by sensor;
While (lock! = 0)
Wait ();
End while
Lock: = 1;
Open (barrier 1);
Enter the security zone;
Close (barrier 1);
Perform payment;
Open (barrier 2);
Leave the safety zone;
Detection by sensor
Lock: = 0;
Close (barrier 2);
End
The cross algorithm uses a shared variable lock which
controls access to the critical section. If lock = 0 then the
secure zone is free, otherwise it is busy and the car must wait.
Initially, lock = 0. Payment operations shall be viewed from
two angles: (1) for users without a subscriber cards, the user
shall be allowed to introduce the sum of $ 1,1 in the electronic
counter, verify the authenticity and value of money introduced
and then generate a ticket if the tests were successful. (2) For
users using a subscriber cards the system should allow the user
to insert his card into the card control system, verify the
validity of the card and return it to the user.
At each crossing, the information is stored in a local
database and replicated to the central database that
interconnects all the toll gates. If the connection to the central
database is interrupted, the toll can work offline due to the
local database. When the connection is restored, the data is
switched to the central database. The tollgate then goes to the
online mode.
The completed prototype must therefore be capable of
simulating the passage of vehicles at tollgates and manage the
various tollgates. It must create, disable, delete a subscription
card, create, edit, view information about a given toll gate, to
visualize the revenue of different toll gates.
B. Requirement of the future tool
54

Roger Atsa Etoundi et al, International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science, 2 (2), Mar-Apr, 2011, 49-56

In developing countries, financial, material and human
resources are not always available for application’s
maintenance on the basis of changes related to its operation.
Future users in most developing countries are not familiar with
the IT tools. As such, the system that will be developed on the
basis of this prototype shall be robust enough to overcome
these shortcomings. This is a strong need in that applications
that are developed in these countries do not always comply
with quality standards because due sometimes to an
insufficiency of funds or deficiency of staff. This constraint is
particularly useful if the system will be deployed at various
toll stations and staff may be assigned to another post, the
system should not differ from one position to another. In
addition, the software developed will allow interfacing with
electronic components to be loaded at the box office and at the
gates. On the other hand, over 70% of drivers have at most a
primary school level. It is recommended to develop a userfriendly ergonomic system in order to prevent misuse at the
tollgates due to the non mastery of the system. Finally,
regulations are not stable in developing countries as it is often
dependent on authorities. To enhance the adaptability of the
system to future changes that may be made based on
management choices, it is recommended that the future system
be self-adaptive to prevent the mobilization of substantial
funds in case of change.

Figure.5 The user performs the payment transaction

When a vehicle is at the electronic counter, the others which
come after must wait outside the barrier.

C. Presentation of simulator
When a vehicle enters the field of the sensor, the
microcontroller checks the state of the lock. If the electronic
counter is available, the barrier opens and the user enters to
perform the payment.

Figure.6 cars waiting

When the first car goes out, the closure of the second barrier
triggers the release of the first barrier and the waiting vehicle
can enter.

Figure.3 checking the availability of the secured zone

Entered the critical zone, the user performs the
payment trough one of the payment modes (cash or card). The
generation of the ticket causes the opening of the second
barrier, which will be closed when the sensor no longer detects
the presence of the vehicle.

Figure.7 Release of the first barrier

V.

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

After more than ten years of management of roads
toll in Cameroon, the objectives of their establishment have
not been achieved due to poor management related to manual
processes. In this work, a model has been defined that would
help in securing the revenue generated by tollgates. We have
proposed a solution that permits in real time to have the toll
© 2010, IJARCS All Rights Reserved

55

Roger Atsa Etoundi et al, International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science, 2 (2), Mar-Apr, 2011, 49-56

revenue on the national territory and the number of vehicles
crossing each tollgate. In this model, a tollgate is represented
by two secure zones, each containing an electronic counter
where the various road users must perform the various
payments before crossing. Access to secure zones is protected
by automatic barriers equipped with sensors and
microcontroller which ensures that at most one vehicle can be
found at the electronic counter at any given time. In our
approach we have identified two types of users: public users
and private users. Private users are those who have to pay tolls
while public users like security and health vehicle are those
who normally do not pay tolls. In this regard, based on current
legislation, any public vehicle which should cross a tollgate
must have a specific card that will allow crossing the tollgate
without paying the fees. When this card is used, all the
information concerning the associated vehicle is contained in
it such that it cannot be used by other roads’ users. For this
reason a matching is always done between information
recorded in the card and the one instantly recorded during the
tollgate crossing process. The transaction will be valid if and
only if the match is successful. Following our model, we have
developed a simulator to validate our approach. We believe
this model can be used in developing countries to secure
revenue from the payment of toll.
In future, we plan to refine the model with particular
emphasis on the reliability of automatic recording of
information contained in the license plates via a sensor on the
one hand, and on the other hand to give crossing possibility to
users without license plates in line with those required or not
at all because in developing countries, the number of such
users is significant.
VI. REFERENCES

[1]

http://www.kwalai.com/toute-lactu-minute-byminute/economie/4534 le péage routier bientôt
automatisé, Septembre 2010,

[2]

[3]
[4]

http://www.camerounactu.net/en/politic/government/26
1-gestion-suspicion-autour-de-la-baisse-des-fonds-dupeage-routier, Septembre 2010
A. B. Cheikh, Y. Tourasse, A. Front, S. Coulondre, J. P.
Giraudin. Vers une approche orientée processus métier
pour les Systèmes d’Information de Transport.
Ministère des Finances, Direction Générale des impôts
(Programme de sécurisation des recettes routières
PSRR), Direction Générale du budget (Comité
interministériel de suivi des opérations du péage routier

© 2010, IJARCS All Rights Reserved

CISOPR), « recueil des textes relatifs au péage
routier ».
[5] T.P.J. Tcheudjeu, « Stratégie d’optimisation des recettes
du péage routier Camerounais », Mémoire de Master 2
de Statistique Appliquée.
[6] NUMBA_BACHUO AKAGBE, « Projet d’aménagement
de la route : rapport d’évaluation, » Département de
l’infrastructure OINF 2006),
[7] H. Tudor, « Modélisation des processus métiers : Etat de
l’art et conseils pratiques», projet SPINOV, Juillet 2006
[8]
Atsa Etoundi Roger, M.F. Ndjodo, P.E. Ndedi, G.A.
Alo’o. “Improving the quality of service, Workflow
based on the ant theory: a case study in Cameroon”,
The Electronic Journal on Information System in
Developing Countries, Vol 41, n0 1,2010
[9] Atsa Etoundi Roger, Fouda Ndjodo Marcel and Atouba
Christian Lopez, “A Goal Based Approach for QFD
Refinement in Systematizing and Identifying Business
Process Requirements”, International Journal of
Computer Science Issues, Vol 7, Issue 6, 2010
[10] Atsa Etoundi Roger, Fouda Ndjodo Marcel and Atouba
Christian Lopez, “A Model based Business Process
Requirement Rule Specification”, International Journal
of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) Volume 11–
No.9, December 2010
[11] Atsa Etoundi Roger, Fouda Ndjodo Marcel and Atouba
Christian Lopez, “A Goal Oriented Approach for the
Definition of a Business Process Requirement
Model”, International Journal of Computer
Applications (0975 – 8887) Volume 9– No.7,
November 2010
[12]
Louis Berger International Inc. “Study to Improve
Management and Financing of Roads”, Final Report
Prepared for the Ministry of Communications and
Transport, Government of Zambia, Insaka; 1996
[13]
Ivansson, Development of Good Governance in the
Road Sector in Finland. Working Paper 21. World
Bank, Sub-Saharan Africa Transport Policy Program,
Africa Technical Department, Washington,D.C.
1995
[14]
Gaviria, J. “Mobilizing Financial Resources for Rural
Roads in Sub-Saharan Africa: Case Studies”, World
Bank, Sub-Saharan Africa Transport Policy Program,
Washington, D.C. 1992
[15] Céline Kauffmann, « La participation du secteur privé
aux infrastructures en Afrique », 11 December 2008
[16] Antonio Estache, « Africa’s infrastructure: challenges
and opportunities », Banque mondiale et ECARES,
Université Libre de Bruxelles, 2006

56

