ISSN No. 0976-5697

!
"!"
%

&

# $ $"
''' (

Virtual Machine - Solution to run Multiple Operating System
Dr. Anwar Pasha Abdul Gafoor Deshmukh*
College of Computers and Information Technology,
University of Tabuk, Tabuk
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
mdanwardmk@yahoo.com

Dr. Riyazuddin Qureshi
Community College, Jazan University,
Jazan, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
riaz_quraysh21@yahoo.com

Abstract: The present study deals with the Development of Multiple Operating Systems on the same Computer. This means that one can keep
more than two operating Systems on the same Computer (e. g. if one has latest version of Microsoft windows vista it is possible to have older
version of Microsoft Windows XP on the same Computer) and simultaneously can carry on the development of multiple application software
with different versions by installing Virtual PC 2007. In the IT world Virtualization refers to the use of virtualization software that allows the
physical hardware of a single PC to run multiple Operating Systems simultaneously in Virtual Machines. The virtualization software simulates
enough hardware to create an environment that allows an unmodified guest operating system (the one running inside a Virtual machine) to be in
isolation on a host operating system (the one running physical computer system). This setup is very useful particularly, in a given scenario where
most of the educational institutions simultaneously offer different courses and different levels of a course syllabus, with limited resources at its
disposal. If we need to teach advanced version of operating systems like “Microsoft Windows Vista”, along with application software
“Microsoft Office 2010” and “Microsoft Internet Explorer 7” and at the same time, older version of Operating System like, “Microsoft Windows
XP”, along with application software, “Microsoft Office 2003” and “Microsoft Internet Explorer 6” as another subject for a different class in the
same Computer lab. This can be done by installing different operating system on different partitions of the disk but such a setup requires
rebooting the computer every time the user intends to shift from one operating system to another. This problem can very-well be solved by
Virtual Machine. User can load two Operating systems like, Microsoft windows Vista and Microsoft Windows XP and then can install
Microsoft office 2010 on the first Virtual Machine and Microsoft office 2003 on the second. Just like all application software click the icon of
virtual machine operating system on desktop of windows 7 or select from start button to switch over to the other operating system as well as
Application software. The study deals with how to create, copy, and configure virtual machines. Microsoft Virtual PC 2007 to run multiple
operating systems at the same time on the same physical computer.
Keywords: Virtual Machine; Virtual PC 2007, Multiple Operating Systems, Hypervisor, virtual machine monitor

I. INTRODUCTION
Although every day we witness advancement in
technology and the fact is that we strive hard to stay abreast of
the changing trends but financial and infrastructural constraints
persists and proves to be a major barrier in offering quality.
Educational institutions play a major role in shaping the society
as well as are feeders of human resources to industries and are
not an exception in case of financial or infrastructural aspect.
Adjustments and compromises to camouflage its weaknesses
directly affect quality of education which in long run is very
harmful for the society at large and industry in particular. In the
IT world Virtualization refers to the use of virtualization
software that allows the physical hardware of a single PC to run
multiple Operating Systems simultaneously in Virtual
Machines. The virtualization software simulates enough
hardware to create an environment that allows an unmodified
guest operating system (the one running inside a Virtual
machine) to be in isolation on a host operating system (the one
running physical computer system) [3]
Although offering various courses on one premise is
optimum utilization of resources but at the same time is the best
source of minting money. Running these courses efficiently is
simply not a policy matter but a technical issue too. Switching
over to the advanced versions of computers, operating systems,
application software, etc. requires huge funds and
simultaneously retaining the older versions for the beginner
students’ is a difficult task. Negligent attitude or an ‘easy© 2010, IJARCS All Rights Reserved

going’ approach for beginner students’ has become a common
practice in education industry. Any adjustment made to cope
up with the situation which refrains the beginner students’ from
having in-depth knowledge of a particular paper badly affects
the quality of education.
The main purpose of Virtual machine is to run multiple
operating systems on same computer. Virtual Machine can be
considered a generalization of Virtual memory. In section 2,
we explain about the scope, Features and limitations and
Hardware requirements. In section 3, is about the software
layer that is used for virtual machine which is called as virtual
machine monitor or Hypervisor. In section 4, we are describing
about Installation of Virtual machine 2007, how to manage
multiple virtual machines as a virtual machine consists of
multiple files and Creating Virtual Machines. To manage
multiple virtual machines effectively, you need to understand
how these files interact. Section 5, describes conclusion
II. SCOPE
Educational institutions strive to offer the best and
optimum but often most of them face financial and
infrastructural constraints. Competitiveness demands to be
staying abreast of the changing trends and thus every one of
these swiftly switches over to the advanced versions of
operating systems and application software. But for students’
opting applied sciences, arts and humanities, linguistics,
business administration, etc. as major need learn basics of
90

Anwar Pasha Abdul Gafoor Deshmukh et al, International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science, 2 (2), Mar-Apr, 2011,90-95

computers.
When it comes to teaching a paper like
“Introduction to Computer Skills and Application” the syllabus
which, most of the educational institutes offer demands to teach
older version of Operating System, “Microsoft Windows XP”
and Application Software, “Microsoft Office 2003”. But
preferably computer labs are equipped with advanced versions
of operating systems like, ‘Microsoft Windows Vista’ and
application software like, ‘Microsoft Office 2010’. Although
switching to a different operating system and application
software can be done by installing these operating systems on
different partitions of the disk but such a setup requires
rebooting the computer system every time the user intends to
shift from one operating system to another. This very well
results into loss of time and could also be a reason for loss of
tempo. Installing Virtual PC 2007 is the best solution to run
Multiple Operating Systems on the same Computer. Such
setup doesn’t need to reboot the system. Just like all other
application software click on the icon of virtual machine
operating system from desktop or select from start menu to run
our choice of Operating System as well as Application
software.

Type 1(Native Virtual machine): The Type 1 hypervisors run
directly on the host hardware of computer to control the
hardware and to monitor guest operating system of same
computer. A guest operating system runs on another level
above the hypervisors.
Type 2 (Hosted Virtual machine): The Type 2 hypervisors run
within a conventional operating system environment with the
hypervisor layer as a distinct second software level. A guest
operating system runs at the third level above the hardware.
IV. INSTALLATION OF VIRTUAL MACHINE 2007
A virtual machine consists of multiple files. To manage
multiple virtual machines effectively, we need to understand
how these files interact. The table below includes a description
of the three types of files that form a virtual machine
Table 1: Description of files

Sr.
no
1

Name of
File
.lnk

Description of files

Remark

Shortcut file for a
registered virtual
machine

2

.vmc

Virtual machine
configuration text
file (XML format)

3

.vhd

Virtual hard disk
file

Points to the virtual
machine's
configuration (.vmc)
file
Contains virtual
machine
configuration
information,
including the name
of the virtual
machine's .vhd file
Represents the hard
disk and its data on
the virtual machine

A. Features of virtual pc 2007
•
•

•
•

•
•

Virtual PC provides a simple wizard to set up different
operating system by just a few clicks.
Access your Windows 7 Folders: My Documents,
Pictures, Desktop, Music, and Video, from inside the
virtual Windows environment, such as Windows XP.
Users can access USB devices attached to the host
directly from virtual Windows XP.
Users can access printers and scanners, flash
memory/sticks and external hard disks, digital
cameras, and more.
Cut and paste between your Windows 7 host and any
virtual machine.
Publish and launch applications installed on virtual
Windows XP directly from the Windows 7 desktop,

B. Limitations
Making virtual machine has certain limitations, it is
less efficient than a real machine when it accesses the hardware
directly and has unstable speed of execution, which highly
depends on the workload imposed on the system by Virtual
machines. [3]
C. Hardware requirements
• 400 MHz Pentium-compatible processor (1.0 GHz or
faster recommended) [3]
• Approximately 35 MB of disk space [3]

When we install a virtual machine with Virtual PC 2007,
the application creates a shortcut file in the \Documents and
Settings\<username>\Application
Data\Microsoft\Virtual
PC\Virtual Machines folder. This folder path is different for
each user. The shortcut points to the virtual machine's
configuration (.vmc) file.[4]
The name of a virtual machine in the Virtual PC Console is
the same as the name of that machine's .vmc file. The .vmc file
contains the virtual machine's configuration settings, such as
the amount of RAM, the number of network adapters, and the
full path of the virtual hard disk (.vhd) file. The .vhd file
represents the hard disk and its data on the virtual machine. By
copying these files and making a few changes, one can create
new virtual machines very quickly.[4]

III. HYPERVISOR
The System Virtual machine allows the sharing of the
physical machine resources between different virtual machines,
each running its own operating systems. The software layer that
is used for virtual machine is called as virtual machine monitor
or Hypervisor. [5]
A. Classification of Hypervisor
The Virtual machine monitor or Hypervisor can be
classified into two categories.

© 2010, IJARCS All Rights Reserved

91

Anwar Pasha Abdul Gafoor Deshmukh et al, International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science, 2 (2), Mar-Apr, 2011,90-95

Figure 3: Options
Figure 1: Virtual PC Console

•
A. Creating Virtual Machines

Select ‘Create a virtual machine’ from Figure 3 to let the
wizard guide you through the basic configuration of the
new virtual machine.

To create virtual machine is to launch the Virtual PC Console,
shown in Figure 1
•

Click on New Virtual Machine Wizard as shown in
Figure 1

Figure 4: Virtual Machine Name and Location

•

On the Virtual Machine Name and Location page that is
Figure 4, type name for the .vmc file, (C:\Documents and
Settings\Administrator\My
Documents\My
Virtual
Machines\WindowXP\WindowXP.vmc) and click on
Next.

Figure 2: Welcome to the New Virtual Machine

•

Click on ‘Next’ button of Figure 2, provides three
options 1): Create a Virtual machine” will have the
settings of virtual hard disk, option 2) “Use default
settings to create a virtual machine” .vmc file with
default settings, without the settings of virtual hard
disk option 3) “Add an existing virtual machine” we
can add Virtual PC Console from existing .vmc files
as shown in figure

Figure 5: Operating System

© 2010, IJARCS All Rights Reserved

92

Anwar Pasha Abdul Gafoor Deshmukh et al, International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science, 2 (2), Mar-Apr, 2011,90-95

•

Select the operating system from Figure 5 to make virtual
machine (Select Windows Xp from list) then click on
Next

Figure 8: Visual Hard Disk Location

•
Figure 6: Memory

•

Allocate the RAM for Virtual machine by selecting
option “Using the recommended RAM” from Figure 6
then click on Next

The virtual hard disk file .vhd (Example C:\Documents
and Settings\Administrator\My Documents\My Virtual
Machines\WindowXP\WindowXP Hard Disk.vhd)
automatically be saved in the same location at .vmc file()
with specified size then click ‘Next’ on Figure 8

Figure 9: Completing the New Virtual Machine Wizard

Figure 7: Visual Hard Disk Options

•

Create .vhd file from here this step provides two options
“An existing Virtual hard disk” and A new virtual hard
disk, choose option 2 from Figure 7 then click Next

© 2010, IJARCS All Rights Reserved

•
•

Click on Finish to complete creation of virtual machine
for Microsoft Windows XP on Figure 9
Similarly, we can create virtual machine for Microsoft
Windows 7 by once again clicking on the New on virtual
PC Console

93

Anwar Pasha Abdul Gafoor Deshmukh et al, International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science, 2 (2), Mar-Apr, 2011,90-95

Figure 10: Completing the New Virtual Machine Wizard with
check box
Figure 12: Settings for New Virtual Machine

•

Click on Next, to Figure 10, Select option 2 “Use default
settings to create a virtual machine” , Click again on Next,
Write the name Windows 7 at name and Location box
then click on Finish with select the Open Setting dialog
box shown by Figure 11

Insert the CD of Windows XP to install simultaneously select
windows 7 then start and install. After successful installation of
both the operating system, user can easily use all these from
desktop just by clicking on the icon of that particular operating
system.
V. CONCLUSION

Figure 11: Settings for New Virtual Machine

•
•
•

In the Settings dialog box, in the Hard Disk 1 area,
select Virtual hard disk file, and then click Browse.
In the Select Virtual Hard Disk dialog box, select the
new .vhd file, and then click Open.
Click OK to close the Settings dialog box

After the virtual machine is created and the virtual hard disk is
associated, user can use the virtual machine in Virtual PC. The
very first thing user need to do with the new virtual machine is
start the virtual machine and install the operating system.
Open the Virtual machine Console, shown in Figure 12, select
any one either Windows 7 or WindowXp and Click on Start

The Virtual Machines are developed under the present work
has been successfully installed, created, implemented and
thoroughly tested. We used this Virtual Machines in all
computer labs in the students we found it to be very effective.
The virtual machines based on the study of various classes
were planned, designed and developed using techniques and
tools described earlier. Virtual PC provides a highly
configurable environment for application development. User
can use Virtual PC to create both single-machine and
networked virtual environments in which developers can
safely try out operating system and application changes. Such
a setup do not requires additional infrastructure and easily
caters to the needs of beginners as well as advanced learners
on one premise.
Refrences
[1] James E Smith, Ravi Nair, “Virtual Machines: Versatile
Platforms For Systems And Processes”, Elsevier, Morgan
Kaufmann, Jun 2005.
[2] Iain D. Craig, “Virtual Machines.” Springer, 1st Edition,
August 30, 2005.
[3] Ron Carsewell, Heidi Webb “Guide to Microsoft Virtual
PC 2007 and Virtual Server 2005 (Networking(Course
Technology))”, Course Technology 1 Edition March
2008, pp-1-70
[4] Cengage, Guide to Microsoft Virtual PC 2007 and Virtual
Server 2005, 1st Edition
[5] Tim Cerling, Jeffrey Buller, Chuk Enstoll, Richard Ruiz
“Mastering Microsoft Virtulization” Sybex 1 Edition,
December 2009
[6] James E. Smith, Ravi Nair, "The Architecture of Virtual
Machines". Computer (IEEE Computer Society) , 2005,
pp. 32-38

© 2010, IJARCS All Rights Reserved

94

Anwar Pasha Abdul Gafoor Deshmukh et al, International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science, 2 (2), Mar-Apr, 2011,90-95

[7] Peter Galli. "Microsoft Sheds More Light on Windows
Hypervisor Technology." April 5, 2006.

in Embedded Systems (IIES'08). ,April 2008pp. 11–
16.(Article in Conference Procedings)

[8] Gernot Heiser. "The role of virtualization in embedded
systems". Proc. 1st Workshop on Isolation and Integration

© 2010, IJARCS All Rights Reserved

95

