IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

27

A Simple Ultrawideband Planar Rectangular Printed
Antenna With Band Dispensation
K. George Thomas and M. Sreenivasan

Abstract—A compact planar ultrawideband (UWB) antenna
with band notched characteristics is presented. Modification in
the shape of radiation element and ground plane with two symmetrical bevel slots on the lower edge of the radiation element and
on the upper edge of the ground plane makes the antenna different
from the rectangular printed monopole. These slots improve the
input impedance bandwidth and the high frequency radiation
characteristics. With this design, the reflection coefficient is lower
than 10 dB in the 3.1–10.6 GHz frequency range and radiation
pattern is similar to dipole antenna. With the inclusion of an
additional small radiation patch, a frequency-notched antenna
is also designed and good out of band performance from 5.0–6.0
GHz can be achieved. Measured results confirm that the antenna
is suitable for UWB applications due to its compact size and
high performance. Also an approximate empirical expression to
calculate the lowest resonant frequency is proposed.
Index Terms—Band-notched antenna, capacitive coupling,
planar monopole, ultrawideband (UWB).

I. INTRODUCTION

T

HE advances in ultrawideband (UWB) systems and
applications are progressing at a prodigious rate. Many
emerging microwave techniques and applications operate on
the UWB frequency spectrum, using ultra short pulses on
the order of nanoseconds. UWB systems have become more
prominent and attracted attention since US-FCC has assigned
the frequency band of 3.1–10.6 GHz in 2002. The primary
objective of UWB is the possibility of achieving high data
rate communication in the presence of existing wireless communication standards. The use of UWB signals in microwave
imaging applications in addition to wireless communications
requires suitable antennas as transducers between UWB transceivers and the propagating medium.
Broadband planar monopole antennas have received considerable attention owing to their attractive merits, such as large
impedance bandwidth, ease of fabrication and acceptable radiation properties [1]–[3]. Conventional planar monopole antennas
need large metallic ground planes perpendicular to the radiation
element, and hence are not low profile, which limits their applications in compact systems. In order to reduce the size considerManuscript received July 28, 2008; revised November 17, 2008. First published July 16, 2009; current version published January 04, 2010.
The authors are with the SAMEER-Centre for Electromagnetics, CIT
Campus, Taramani, Chennai-600113, India (e-mail: gt2781964@yahoo.com;
sreeni_vm@yahoo.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TAP.2009.2036279

ably, a series of planar UWB antennas with microstrip or CPW
feeding structures were proposed in [4]–[12].
Ultrawideband (UWB) transmitter can cause EM interference
to nearby communication systems such as the wireless local area
network (WLAN). Therefore UWB antennas with notched characteristics in the WLAN frequency bands are required and can
be found in [13]–[15]. There are various methods to achieve
the band-notched characteristics. The conventional methods are
cutting a slot (i.e., U-shaped, arc shaped and pi-shaped slot) on
the patch [16]–[20], inserting a slit on the patch [21]–[23] and
embedding a quarter wavelength tuning stub within a large slot
on the patch [24]. Alternate way is putting parasitic elements
near the printed monopole as filters to reject the limited band
[25], or embedding a pair of T-shaped stubs inside as elliptical
slot, cut in the radiation patch [26].
In this paper a simple microstrip fed UWB antenna is proposed with an empirical formula to calculate the lowest resonant
frequency of planar monopole/dipole configurations. Symmetrical bevel slots are formed on the radiation and ground patch
to cause a wide bandwidth from 3.1–10.6 GHz for UWB applications. The notched band covering the 5 GHz WiFi band is
achieved by a small rectangular patch fed by 50 transmission
line. The width and length of the patch offer sufficient freedom
in selecting the notched band and the approach is capable of
shifting the notched frequency with steeper rise in V.S.W.R.
The antenna has a compact size of 30 mm 18 mm 0.76 mm.
The measured 10-dB reflection coefficient shows that the proposed antenna achieves a bandwidth ranging from 3–11 GHz
with a notched band of 5–6 GHz. The proposed antenna presents
omnidirectional radiation patterns across the whole operating
band in the -plane.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II gives a brief
description of the antenna configuration. Section III presents the
proposed design method and results of simulation using Ansoft
HFSS. Section IV reports on experimental results and Section V
concludes the findings of this paper.
II. ANTENNA CONFIGURATION
Fig. 1 shows the geometry of the proposed antenna. It consists
of a rectangular radiation patch with symmetrical bevel slots
placed on the lower side of the patch and a partially modified
rectangular ground plane with symmetrical bevel slots located
and play a
on its upper side. These slots with dimensions
significant role in achieving a broad impedance bandwidth. The
cutting of slots results in steps on the lower side of the radiation
patch as well as on the upper side of the ground plane. The
width of the step formed is denoted as and the gap between
the radiation patch and the ground plane is denoted as . A 50

0018-926X/$26.00 © 2009 IEEE

28

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

=
30 mm = 14 4 mm = 14 4 mm = 18 mm g = 1 2 mm
w = 3 5 mm h = 3 mm s = 11 mm a = 5 3 mm b = 7 mm
= 15 6 mm w = 1 4 mm H = 0 76 mm
Fig. 1. Configuration of the proposed band notched UWB printed antenna L
,l
:
:
:
,l
,W
,
,
:
,
:
,
,
,
,
:
,
:
:
l
,
.

microstrip line of width 1.4 mm is connected to the radiation
patch as the feed line.
It can be seen from Fig. 1 that the rectangular radiation patch
and the 50 line are printed on the top side of the substrate
while the ground plane is printed on the bottom side of the
substrate. A small rectangular patch with dimensions and ,
printed on the bottom side of the substrate is connected to the 50
line through via-hole to produce a notched band in the vicinity
of 5.5 GHz and thus prevents the interference with WLAN systems. The antenna was implemented on an inexpensive FR4 substrate with a thickness of 0.76 mm and relative permittivity of
4.4.
A prototype of the proposed band notched UWB rectangular
,
printed antenna with optimal design, i.e.,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
, as shown in Fig. 1, was
fabricated and tested and the reflection coefficients were measured using Agilent network analyzer E8363B. Fig. 2 shows the
simulated and measured reflection coefficient curves. The measurement confirms the UWB and band-rejection characteristics
of the proposed antenna, as predicted in the simulation.
III. ANTENNA DESIGN
In this section, the antenna covering the full UWB band
(3.1–10.6 GHz) is first described. Then the new band notched
structure which is equivalent to series LC circuit, is investigated. The effects of changing the geometric parameters of the
proposed antenna on impedance, bandwidth and radiation pattern are discussed. The proposed antenna structure is simulated
using the Ansoft High Frequency Structure Simulator (HFSS)
software, with lumped port excitation.
A. UWB Antenna Design
The UWB antenna design features a gap (slot) between the radiation patch and the ground plane which introduces a coupling

Fig. 2. Measured and simulated reflection coefficients of the proposed UWB
antenna.

capacitance and plays an important role in obtaining UWB behavior. Hence the ground plane of the proposed antenna is also
a part of the radiating configuration and current distribution on
the ground plane affects the characteristics of the antenna. It is
to be noted that the radiation patch, the gap and the ground plane
form an equivalent dipole antenna with fundamental resonance,
mainly determined by the length of the antenna. It is worth mentioning that closely spaced multiple resonances which are harmonics of fundamental resonance overlap, resulting in ultrawide
bandwidth. The size of the gap opening defines the impedance
matching and hence by placing bevel slots on the lower side of
the radiation patch and on the upper side of the ground plane,
impedance bandwidth is considerably enhanced.
Figs. 3 and 4 show the variation of the reflection coefficients
with frequency for different dimensions of the bevel slots. It is
, the reflection
seen that in the absence of bevels,
coefficient behavior at low frequencies is identical to a narrow
band dipole with current mainly distributed over the radiation
patch and the ground plane. The placing of slots significantly
improves the higher band impedance matching as the shaping
of the lower edge of the radiation patch has a substantial effect
on the impedance matching of printed monopole antennas. The
reason is that the slot formed by the lower edge of the radiation patch and the ground plane with a proper dimensions can
support traveling waves at higher frequencies. Hence, properly
designing the dimensions of the four bevel slots on the radiation
patch and the ground plane will enhance traveling wave mode
radiation and improve the impedance matching at higher frequency band. However, the ground plane on the other side of
the substrate cannot form a good slot with the radiation patch to
fully support traveling waves and hence the antenna operates in
hybrid mode of traveling and standing waves at higher frequencies. It is also seen that the fundamental resonant frequency is
lowered as the bevel slot dimensions are increased. This also
contributes to widening the operating bandwidth. The lowering
of the resonant frequency is due to the fact that the effective gap
between the radiation element and the ground plane is increased
as the bevel slots are increased in size. In other words, by properly choosing the dimensions of slots, impedance bandwidth can

THOMAS AND SREENIVASAN: A SIMPLE UWB PLANAR RECTANGULAR PRINTED ANTENNA

Fig. 3. Simulated reflection coefficients for the proposed antenna of various
bevel widths (w ) with a fixed value of bevel height (h ) = 3 mm. a = b =
0 mm. Other parameters are the same as given in Fig. 1.

29

where is the probe length (gap between the ground plane and
the rectangular monopole) of the 50 feed line and , and
are in centimeters.
It may be noted that the radiation pattern of these antennas
are more like that of a dipole pattern and hence planar printed
monopole antenna can be considered as printed dipole of length
including the length of the ground plane. It can be seen that
in [4], while determining the resonant frequencies of circular
discs of different diameters, the height of ground plane is kept
constant. But the total length of the antenna configuration is
changed with different diameter of circular disc. It is to be noted
that change of the dimension of circular disc will not cause a
change in resonant frequency as long as the total length of the
antenna remains same. Hence it is understood that all reported
printed monopoles are in effect dipoles with a fundamental resonant frequency and the height of the ground plane contributes
in determining the resonant frequency.
However ultra wide band microstrip-fed planar elliptical
dipole antenna has been reported [10]. Further, microstrip-fed
semi-elliptical dipole antenna, covering the frequency band
from 3.1–10.6 GHz, has been proposed with a small size of
dimensions of about one third of the wavelength, instead of
half wavelength for the lower frequency [11]. It is found that
the length of the antenna is about half wavelength at the lowest
frequency of operation, if the dielectric constant of the material
of the substrate is taken into consideration.
Hence an approximate general formula is proposed to represent the fundamental resonant frequency of any planar printed
radiation configuration with a ground plane.
By equating the area of the planar printed configuration to
that of a cylindrical wire of length

(3)
Fig. 4. Simulated reflection coefficients for the proposed antenna of various
bevel heights (h ) with a fixed value of bevel width (w ) = 3:5 mm. a = b =
0 mm. Other parameters are the same as given in Fig. 1.

since

be enhanced. From the simulated results in Figs. 3 and 4, it ocand
.
curs when

(4)
(5)

B. Simple Formula for Resonant Frequency
The frequency corresponding to the lower resonance of a rectangular planar monopole can be approximately calculated by
equating its area to that of an equivalent cylindrical monopole
antenna of same length and equivalent radius , as given below
[3]

where and are the width and the length of the planar element
and is the radius of the equivalent cylindrical wire.
is the effective dielectric constant of the composite
(air-substrate) dielectric.
At fundamental resonance, the length of cylindrical dipole for
real input impedance is given by [27]

(1)
where
is the width of the rectangular disc
is given by
The lower frequency

(6)
where

(2)

30

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

Thus

(7)

TABLE I
EFFECT OF WIDTHS OF THE GROUND PLANE AND RADIATION PATCH ON
RESONANT FREQUENCY FOR THE PROPOSED ANTENNA WITH CONSTANT STEP
WIDTH s (s = 11 mm). w DENOTES THE WIDTH OF THE GROUND PLANE
AND w DENOTES THE WIDTH OF THE RADIATION ELEMENT

From the above equations, the resonant frequency is given by

(8)
where and are in centimeters
If and denote the length of the ground plane and radiation
patch respectively and is the gap between them, then can be
.
expressed as
Similarly if and represent the radius of equivalent cylindrical dipole corresponding to the ground plane and radiation
(In the case of cylinpatch, then can be expressed as
and
can be considered as the radius of the
drical dipole,
).
dipole arms and
Hence

(9)
and from (5)

TABLE II
SIMULATED VARIATION OF RESONANT FREQUENCY WITH CHANGE IN
DIELECTRIC CONSTANT OF THE SUBSTRATE MATERIAL FOR THE PROPOSED
ANTENNA WITHOUT BEVEL SLOTS

(10)
(11)
where
and
are the area of the ground plane and the radiation patch respectively. , , , and are in centimeters.
In order to demonstrate the effect of the width of the ground
plane and radiation patch on resonant frequency, simulations
were done using HFSS by keeping the step width ” constant
and the results are shown in Table I.
Table II shows the simulated and calculated resonant frequencies for different . It is observed that plays a role in determining the resonant frequency and as decreases the resonant
frequency is lowered and the resonant frequency is increased
with increasing .
Table III shows the comparison between the reported measured resonant frequencies of printed monopoles of different
configurations and the calculated results using the proposed formula.

the patch to determine the center frequency and bandwidth of
the rejected band. The band notched performance is related
to the parameters and “ ” which are the length and width
of the rectangular patch. The open circuited small rectangular
patch introduced on the bottom side of the substrate is shunt
connected to the radiation patch through a via hole. Here, is
the coupling gap between the resonator and the ground plane.
The small rectangular patch acts as a resonator and introduces
capacitive coupling to offer series resonance band stop function. Since the resonator has an impedance zero at its resonant
frequency . the main line is effectively shorted at and thus
no power is delivered to the radiation patch. It is to be noted
that capacitive coupled transmission line inductor is less than
quarter wavelength at the resonant frequency. The wavelength
corresponding to the resonant frequency is given as

C. The Band Rejection Function for WLAN Band
The UWB system, operating between 3.1–10.6 GHz causes
interference to the existing wireless communication systems, for
example the WLAN operating in 5.15–5.85 GHz. The band rejection filter employed in UWB RF front-ends avoids the interference but gives complications to the UWB system. To overcome this difficulty, UWB antenna with a band rejected characteristic is required.
The band rejection function of the proposed antenna is
achieved by printing a small rectangular patch on the bottom
side of the substrate and properly tuning the dimensions of

(12)
The area of the rectangular patch with length and width can
be equated to that of an equivalent cylindrical monopole antenna
of height and equivalent radius . The average characteristic
impedance can be defined as [28]

(13)

THOMAS AND SREENIVASAN: A SIMPLE UWB PLANAR RECTANGULAR PRINTED ANTENNA

31

TABLE III
COMPARISON OF RESONANT FREQUENCIES FOR VARIOUS TYPES OF PRINTED MONOPOLE ANTENNA CONFIGURATIONS

from (3)
(14)
from (4)
(15)

It may be noted that the capacitance of a rectangular patch primarily depends on the width of the patch, rather than its length.
Therefore, when the width of the rectangular patch is changed,
capacitance of the resonator changes with insignificant variation
, where
is the
in inductance. Hence it is assumed that
inductance when is changed.
and
represent the characteristic impedance and resIf
onant frequency for the changed width then

and
where
The inductive reactance offered by the rectangular patch with
can be expressed as
resistance
and
(16)
where
and is the resistance
per unit length.
Since the rectangular patch resonates at a length approximately equal to quarter wavelength
(17)
Hence
(18)
and

corresponds to resonant frequency for optimal
where
) and width (
) of the resonator
length (
with inductance , capacitance and characteristic impedance
is
Similarly, when the length of the rectangular patch
changed, inductance of the resonator changes with insignificant
,
variation in capacitance. Hence, it is assumed that
where
is the capacitance when is changed.
and
represent the characteristic impedance and resIf
onant frequency for the changed length then

(23)
(19)

Therefore
(20)
(21)
where

(22)

is the resonant frequency of the patch resonator.

Figs. 5 and 6 show the variation of simulated reflection coefficients with different values of and . It is seen that as the
length and width of the rectangular patch increase, the center
frequency of the rejected band shifts to the lower frequencies.
Tables IV and V demonstrate the effect of the length and
width of the rectangular patch (resonator) on the resonant frequency (center frequency of the rejected band).
Fig. 7 shows the surface current distributions at the pass-band
and stop-band. At the stop band, a strong electric coupling (capacitive coupling) occurs at the bottom edge of the resonator

32

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

TABLE V
EFFECT OF LENGTH OF THE RECTANGULAR PATCH ON RESONANT FREQUENCY
OF THE REJECTED BAND FOR CONSTANT PATCH WIDTH b = 7 mm

Fig. 5. Simulated reflection coefficients for the proposed antenna of various
notch element length a with a fixed notch element width b = 7 mm. Other
parameters are the same as given in Fig. 1.

Fig. 6. Simulated reflection coefficients for the proposed antenna of various
notch element width b with a fixed notch element length a = 5:3 mm. Other
parameters are the same as given in Fig. 1.

TABLE IV
EFFECT OF WIDTH OF THE RECTANGULAR PATCH ON RESONANT FREQUENCY
OF THE REJECTED BAND FOR CONSTANT PATCH LENGTH a = 5:3 mm

Fig. 7. Simulated current distribution of the proposed antenna (a) pass-band
(at 3.5 GHz) and (b) stop-band (at 5.5 GHz).

proposed antenna is indeed controlled by the length and width
of the rectangular patch.
IV. MEASURED ANTENNA PERFORMANCE

patch. Also the surface currents are concentrated at the resonator
and the antenna does not radiate. This is analogous to the signal
drop across the - combination in a series resonant band-stop
filter, at resonance. However, at the pass band, the electric coupling does not occur at the bottom edge. The resonator does not
work and the antenna returns to the normal operation. It can be
concluded that the center frequency of the notch band for the

Based on the design in the previous section, the proposed
band-notched UWB antenna was fabricated and fed by a 50
SMA connector. The measured and simulated reflection coefficient of the proposed antenna from 3–11 GHz is shown in Fig. 2.
Measured and simulated results track fairly well.
Fig. 8 shows the measured radiation patterns at 3, 6, and 9
GHz, respectively. It can be seen that the patterns of the proposed antenna present omnidirectional and stable radiation characteristics in the - plane ( -plane) over the operating frequency range which are similar to the typical dipole antenna.
The - plane ( -plane) patterns shown in Fig. 9. demonstrate
that at 3 GHz, the pattern is approximately symmetrical. As the
width of the radiator is comparable with wave length at higher

THOMAS AND SREENIVASAN: A SIMPLE UWB PLANAR RECTANGULAR PRINTED ANTENNA

33

Fig. 10. Measured and simulated gain of the proposed band notched UWB antenna.

Fig. 8. Measured radiation patterns of the proposed band notched UWB anand E
component).
tenna in x-y plane (E

Fig. 11. Photograph of the fabricated antenna.

UWB frequency band and a gain drop of 6–7 dB occurs at 5.5
GHz. A photograph of the proposed antenna when printed on
FR4 substrate is displayed in Fig. 11.
V. CONCLUSION
Fig. 9. Measured radiation patterns of the proposed band notched UWB anand E
component).
tenna in x-z plane (E

frequencies, the patterns deviate from symmetry, as can be seen
at 6.0 and 9.0 GHz.
Fig. 10 shows the measured and simulated gains of the realized antenna from 3–11 GHz. The figure indicates that the proposed antenna has reasonably good gain over the band of frequencies except for the notched band. Close agreement between
measured and simulated results can be found. The measured antenna gain variations are less than 2 dB throughout the desired

A microstrip-fed rectangular printed antenna is proposed and
implemented for UWB applications. The overall antenna size is
30 mm 18 mm 0.76 mm. The antenna, compact and simple,
has minimum design parameters which have been investigated
for optimal design. A frequency-notched antenna is also realized with good out of band performance from 5–6 GHz by including an additional small radiation patch. Besides, by taking
the dielectric constant of the substrate into consideration, an approximate empirical formula is presented to calculate the lowest
resonant frequency for the planar printed monopole/dipole antennas in general. Study and examination of the formula have
shown that various printed geometric configurations reported as
planar monopoles can be defined and demonstrated as planar

34

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

printed dipoles. The present design can easily be extended to
dual or triple band-notched antennas. The operating bandwidth
of the proposed antenna covers the entire frequency band from
3.1–10.6 GHz.Both simulated and measured results suggest that
the proposed antenna is suitable for UWB communication applications and at the same time dispenses the interference with
WLAN systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank G. Sreekumar and P.
Karthikeyan for their help in the fabrication and measurement
of the antenna.
REFERENCES
[1] N. P. Agarwall, G. Kumar, and K. P. Ray, “Wideband planar monopole
antennas,” IEEE Trans Antennas Propag., vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 294–295,
1998.
[2] Z. N. Chen, M. Y. W. Chia, and M. J. Ammann, “Optimization and
comparison of broadband monopoles,” Proc. Inst. Elect. Eng. Microw.
Antennas Propag., vol. 150, no. 6, pp. 429–435, 2003.
[3] G. Kumar and K. P. Ray, Broad Band Microstrip Antennas. Boston,
MA: Artech House, 2003.
[4] J. Liang, C. C. Chiau, X. Chen, and C. G. Parini, “Study of a printed disc
monopole antenna for UWB systems,” IEEE Trans. Antennas. Propag.,
vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 3500–3504, Nov. 2005.
[5] C. Y. Huang and W. C. Hsia, “Planar elliptical antenna for ultra wideband application,” Electron.Lett., vol. 41, no. 41, 6, pp. 296–297, Mar.
2005.
[6] X. Qing, M. Y. WChia, and X. Wu, “Wide-slot antenna for UWB applications,” in Proc. IEEE AP-S Int. Symp., Jun. 2003, vol. 1, pp. 834–837.
[7] R. Chair, A. A. Kishk, and K. F. Lee, “Ultrawideband coplanar waveguide-fed rectangular slot antenna,” Antennas Wireless Prop. Lett., vol.
3, no. 1, pp. 227–229, 2004.
[8] S. H. Hsu and K. Chang, “Ultra-thin CPW-fed rectangular slot antenna
for UWB applications,” in Proc. IEEE AP.-S Int. Symp., Jul. 2006, pp.
2587–2590.
[9] S. H. Lee, J. K. Park, and J. N. Lee, “A novel CPW-fed ultrawideband
antenna design,” Microw. Opt. Tech. Lett., vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 393–396,
2005.
[10] J.-P. Zhang, Y.-S. Xu, and W.-D. Wang, “Ultra-wideband microstrip-fed planar elliptical dipole antenna,” Electron. Lett., vol. 42,
no. 3, pp. 144–145, 2006.
[11] J.-P. Zhang, Y.-S. Xu, and W.-D. Wang, “Microstrip-fed semi-elliptical
antenna for ultrawideband communications,” IEEE Trans. Antennas.
Propag., vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 241–244, Jan. 2008.
[12] Y. J. Ren and K. Chnag, “Ultra-wideband planar elliptical ring antenna,” Electron. Lett., vol. 42, no. 8, pp. 447–448, 2006.
[13] J. M. Qiu, Z. W. Du, J. H. Lu, and K. Gong, “A band-notched UWB
antenna,” Microw. Opt. Tech. Lett., vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 152–154, 2005.
[14] K. H. Kim, Y. J. Cho, S. H. Hwang, and S. O. Park, “Band-notched
UWB planar monopole antenna with two parasitic patches,” Electron.
Lett., vol. 41, no. 14, pp. 783–785, 2006.
[15] C. Y. Huang, W. C. Hsia, and J. S. Kuo, “Planar ultrawideband antenna
with a band-notched characteristic,” Microw. Opt. Tech. Lett., vol. 48,
no. 1, pp. 99–101, 2006.
[16] J. N. Lee and J. K. Park, “Impedance characteristic of trapezoidal ultrawideband antenna with a notch function,” Microw. Opt. Tech. Lett., vol.
46, no. 5, pp. 503–506, Sep. 2005.
[17] H. K. Lee, J. K. Park, and J. N. Lee, “Design of a planar half- circle
shaped UWB notch antenna,” Microw. Opt. Tech. Lett., vol. 47, no. 1,
pp. 9–11, Oct. 2005.

[18] K. L. Wong, Y. W. Chi, C. M. Su, and F. S. Chang, “Band-notched
ultra-wideband circular-disc monopole antenna with an arc shaped
slot,” Microw. Opt. Tech. Lett., vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 188–191, May 2005.
[19] C. Y. Huang, W. C. Hsia, and J. S. Kuo, “Planar ultra-wideband antenna with band-notched characteristic,” Microw. pt. Tech. Lett., vol.
48, no. 1, pp. 99–101, Jan. 2006.
[20] C. Y. Huang and W. C. Hsia, “Planar ultra-wideband antenna with a
frequency notch characteristic,” Microw.Opt.Tech.Lett., vol. 49, no. 2,
pp. 316–320, Feb. 2007.
[21] H. Yoon, H. Kim, K. Chang, Y. J. Yoon, and Y. H. Kim, “A study on
the UWB antenna with band-rejection characteristic,” in Proc. IEEE
AP-S Int. Symp., Jun. 2004, vol. 2, pp. 1780–1783.
[22] I. J. Yoon, H. Kim, K. Chang, Y. J. Yoon, and Y. H. Kim, “Ultrawideband tapered slot antenna with band-stop characteristic,” in Proc. IEEE
AP-S Int. Symp., Jun. 2004, vol. 2, pp. 1784–1787.
[23] S. Y. Suh, W. L. Stutzman, W. A. Davis, A. E. Waltho, K. W. Skeba,
and J. L. Schiffer, “A UWB antenna with stop-band notch in the 5 GHz
WLAN band,” in Proc. IEEE ACES Int.C onf., Apr. 2005, pp. 203–207.
[24] Y. Gao, B. L. Ooi, and A. P. Popov, “Band-notched ultrawideband
ring monopole antenna,” Microw. Opt. Tech. Lett., vol. 48, no. 1, pp.
125–126, Jan. 2006.
[25] K. H. Kim, Y. J. Cho, S. H. Hwang, and S. O. Park, “Band-notched
UWB planar monopole antenna with two parasitic patches,” Electron.
Lett., vol. 41, no. 14, pp. 783–785, Jul. 2005.
[26] C.-Y. Hong, C.-W. Ling, I.-Y. Yarn, and S.-J. Chung, “Design of a
planar ultrawideband antenna with a band-notch structure,” IEEE Antennas Propag., vol. 55, no. 12, Dec. 2007.
[27] C. A. Balanis, Antenna Theory: Analysis and Design. New York:
Harper and Row, 1982.
[28] E. C. Jordan and K. G. Balmain, Electromagnetic Waves and Radiating
Systems. Englewood Park, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1968.
K. George Thomas received the M.Sc. degree
in electronics from Kerala University, India, and
the M.Tech. degree in microwaves and radar from
Cochin University of Science and Technology
(CUSAT), Cochin, India, in 1987 and 1989, respectively.
In 1990, he joined the Society for Applied Microwave Electronics Engineering and Research
(SAMEER), Chennai, as a Scientist, where he has
been involved in antenna design and measurements.
His productive work has resulted in the development
of a number of broadband and high performance antennas. In 1992, he was
deputed to the Georgia Tech Research Institute, Atlanta, to work on shielding
effectiveness of gaskets for EM shielding applications. He has authored and
coauthored many papers in refereed journals and conference proceedings. He
has one Indian patent to his credit. His main research interests include broadband planar and printed monopoles, ultrawideband VHF/UHF omnidirectional
antennas and high performance directional antennas.
Dr. Thomas is a Life member of the Society of EMC Engineers, India
(SEMCI).

M. Sreenivasan received the M.Sc. degree in electronic science and the M.Tech. degree in microwave
and radar engineering from Cochin University of
Science and Technology (CUSAT), Cochin, India, in
2002 and 2004, respectively.
In 2004, he joined SAMEER-Centre for Electromagnetics, Chennai, India, as a Research Scientist in
the Electromagnetics and Antenna Division, where
he is currently working as a Scientist.
His research interests include wideband and
multiband printed antennas and wideband aperture
antennas and metamaterials.

