IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

1031

A Compact Tri-Band Monopole Antenna
With Single-Cell Metamaterial Loading
Jiang Zhu, Student Member, IEEE, Marco A. Antoniades, Member, IEEE, and George V. Eleftheriades, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—A compact tri-band planar monopole antenna is proposed that employs reactive loading and a “defected” ground-plane
structure. The reactive loading of the monopole is inspired by
transmission-line based metamaterials (TL-MTM), which enables
the loaded antenna to operate in two modes. The first resonance
exhibits a dipolar mode over the lower WiFi band of 2.40 GHz –
2.48 GHz, and the second resonance has a monopolar mode over
the 5.15–5.80 GHz upper WiFi band. Full-wave analysis shows
that the currents of the two modes are orthogonal to each other, resulting in orthogonal radiation patterns in the far field. The feature
of a “defected” ground-plane, formed by appropriately cutting an
L-shaped slot out of one of the CPW ground-planes, leads to the
third resonance that covers the WiMAX band at 3.30–3.80 GHz.
Air bridges at the intersection between the antenna and the CPW
feedline ensure a balanced current. A fabricated prototype has
compact dimensions of 20.0 mm 23.5 mm 1.59 mm, and
exhibits good agreement between the measured and simulated
parameters and radiation patterns. The measured radiation
efficiencies are 67.4% at 2.45 GHz, 86.3% at 3.50 GHz and 85.3%
at 5.50 GHz.
Index Terms—Defected ground plane, folded monopole antenna,
metamaterials, multiband antenna.

I. INTRODUCTION

T

WO commonly used protocols for Wireless Local Area
Networks (WLANs) based on access points to relay data,
are WiFi and WiMAX, which promise higher data rates and increased reliability. A challenge in designing such multiple wireless communication protocol systems is to design compact, low
cost, multiband and broadband antennas.
The planar monopole is attractive for WLAN antenna design
because it has a low profile, it can be etched on a single substrate
and can provide the feature of broadband or multiband operation. The traditional approach is to use multibranched strips
in order to achieve multiband operation [1], which generally
leads to a large volume or requires a large ground-plane. Alternatively, the concept of the frequency-reconfigurable multiband
antenna [2] has been proposed to develop multiband monopole
antennas for WiFi and WiMAX applications [3]. Such reconfigurable antennas are reported to have the advantages of being
able to switch to a desired service and to achieve good out-of
Manuscript received June 18, 2009; revised September 25, 2009; accepted
October 27, 2009. Date of publication January 26, 2010; date of current version
April 07, 2010. The work of J. Zhu was supported by an IEEE Antenna and
Propagation Society Graduate Fellowship.
The authors are with the Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3G4, Canada
(e-mail: jiangzhu@waves.utoronto.ca; gelefth@waves.utoronto.ca).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TAP.2010.2041317

Fig. 1. Tri-band monopole antenna with single-cell MTM loading and a “de,W
:,
fected” ground-plane. All dimensions are in mm: L
L
,W
: ,W
: ,W
: ,h
,W
,
W
: ,L
: ,L
: ,L
,L
,W
,
: and slot width g . (a) Top view. (b) 3D schematic.
h

= 11
= 23 5
= 90
= 25
= 55
= 55
= 1 59
=1

= 12 5
=9

=8
=1
=3

= 58
=3
=7

band noise rejection performance. However, this is traded off
with an increased design complexity and an increased fabrication cost associated with switches and bias circuits.
Transmission-line metamaterials (TL-MTM) [4]–[6] provide
a conceptual route for implementing small resonant antennas
[7]–[17]. TL-MTM structures operating at resonance were first
proposed in order to implement small printed antennas in [8]
and [9]. Furthermore, a dual-band MTM-inspired small antenna
for WiFi applications was shown in [18] and multiband MTM
resonant antennas were shown to exhibit several left-handed
modes in [19]. However, typically TL-MTM antennas suffer
from narrow bandwidths. Recently, [12] addressed the bandwidth problem by proposing a two-arm TL-MTM antenna resonating at two closely spaced frequencies. Another method to
enhance the bandwidth consists of merging two resonances together in a TL-MTM printed monopole antenna [20].
In this work, a compact tri-band monopole antenna is proposed using reactive loading, that was inspired by previous
TL-MTM work, and a “defected” ground-plane [21], in order
to meet the specifications of the WiFi bands (lower WiFi band
of 2.40 GHz – 2.48 GHz and upper WiFi band of 5.15 GHz –
5.80 GHz) and the WiMAX (3.30 GHz – 3.80 GHz) band while
maintaining a small form factor. Herein, we thoroughly explain
the operation of the proposed tri-band antenna and we fully
characterize its performance both numerically and experimentally. As shown in Fig. 1, the proposed co-planar waveguide
(CPW)-fed monopole antenna is loaded in a left-handed
manner, inspired by the NRI-TL metamaterial unit cell [11].

0018-926X/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE

1032

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

Fig. 2. (a) Case 1: unloaded monopole antenna, (b) Case 2: dual-band
monopole antenna with single-cell MTM loading and (c) Final: tri-band
monopole antenna with single-cell MTM loading and a “defected” ground.
The dimensions of these antennas are given in the caption of Fig. 1. (a) Case 1.
(b) Case 2. (c) Final.

This loading consists of a single MTM cell which allows the
monopole antenna to operate in two modes [20], covering both
the WiFi bands. The first is a folded monopole mode, where the
monopole together with the single-cell MTM loading forms a
folded monopole around the frequency of 5.5 GHz [11]; The
second mode is a dipole mode where the single-cell MTM
loading forces horizontal currents to flow along the top edges of
the ground-plane, thus rendering the entire ground a radiator at
around 2.5 GHz. It will be shown in Section II, that the currents
corresponding to the two modes are orthogonal to each other,
as shown in Fig. 5. The third resonance covering the WiMAX
band from 3.3 GHz to 3.8 GHz, is achieved by “defecting” the
ground-plane by cutting an -shaped slot from one side of the
CPW ground. Air bridges are added at the antenna terminals to
ensure that only balanced currents flow on the CPW feedline.
The resulting antenna is compact (including the ground-plane),
completely uniplanar, low profile and “via-free”. Therefore, the
proposed antenna is easy to fabricate using simple photolithography. A prototype antenna has been fabricated and tested. The
measurements show good impedance matching at the WiFi
and WiMAX bands, orthogonal pattern diversity in each of the
WiFi bands and a reasonable radiation efficiency, all of which
make it well suited for wireless LAN applications.
II. ANTENNA DESIGN
The antenna was designed on a low-cost FR4 substrate with
mm,
and
. A rectheight
angular patch was chosen as the monopole radiation element.
The length of the patch was adjusted according to the general
design guideline that the lowest resonance is determined when
, is approximately
. Therethe length of the monopole,
monopole results in the lowest resfore, an
onance occurring at 6.0 GHz, as can be seen in Fig. 4. This
refers to the initial design where the metamaterial-inspired reactive loading and the “defected” ground-plane are not employed,
which is shown as Case 1 in Fig. 2. In order to compare the performances with the proposed tri-band antenna shown in Fig. 1,
the size of the monopole element and the width of the ground
for Case 1 were kept the same as the proposed design. However, the length of the ground in Case 1 was adjusted to 20 mm
in order to achieve good impedance matching. The antenna was
fed by a CPW transmission-line, which can be easily integrated

Fig. 3. The equivalent circuit when the proposed tri-band antenna operates at
the monopole mode. The dimension d refers to the size of the NRI-TL unit cell
and it corresponds to roughly the length of the monopole L with reference to
Fig. 1(a).

Fig. 4. Simulated jS j for Case 1: unloaded monopole antenna, Case 2:
dual-band monopole antenna with single-cell MTM loading and Final: tri-band
monopole antenna with single-cell MTM loading and a “defected” ground, as
shown in Fig. 2.

with other CPW-based microwave circuits printed on the same
substrate. The CPW feed was connected to the coaxial cable
through a standard 50 SMA connector. All the structures were
simulated in the finite-element method (FEM) based full-wave
solver, Ansoft HFSS. The connector and coaxial cable were included in all simulations to characterize their effects on the antenna performance. Since the operating frequency of the initial
design (unloaded monopole) was above the range of interest for
existing wireless LAN applications, different approaches using
single-cell MTM loading and a “defected” ground were pursued
to create the corresponding second and third resonances, at a
lower frequency range in order to meet the wireless LAN specifications.
A. Single-Cell Metamaterial Reactive Loading
In order to maintain the antenna’s small form-factor while
decreasing the operating frequency, the CPW monopole was
loaded with a single asymmetric negative-refractive-index
unit cell.
transmission-line (NRI-TL) metamaterial-based
The equivalent circuit for the antenna of Fig. 1 is shown in Fig. 3
,
(at the folded monopole mode). The series capacitance,
was formed between the monopole on the top of the substrate
and the rectangular patch on the bottom of the substrate (see
Fig. 1(b)). The MTM cell was asymmetrically loaded with two
and .
was formed by the inductive
shunt inductances,
was formed by
strip at the base of the monopole, while
the thin inductive strip that joins the rectangular patch beneath

ZHU et al.: A COMPACT TRI-BAND MONOPOLE ANTENNA WITH SINGLE-CELL METAMATERIAL LOADING

1033

Fig. 6. Simulated jS j of the equivalent dipole antenna representing the triband monopole antenna with single-cell MTM loading and a “defected” groundplane when operating under the dipole mode, as shown in Fig. 5(b).

Fig. 5. HFSS-simulated surface current distribution on the conductors of the
tri-band monopole antenna with single-cell MTM loading and a “defected”
ground-plane at the resonant frequencies of (a) 5.80 GHz and (b) 2.44 GHz.
(a) Folded monopole mode (5.80 GHz). (b) Dipole mode (2.44 GHz).

the monopole to the rectangular patch beneath the right-hand
ground plane.
In order to simplify the fabrication, a via-free approach to
implement the asymmetric unit cell was used, which can be
realized using low-cost thin-film technology. In order to achieve
a shunt RF short to ground at high frequencies, the capacitor
was used, which connects the shunt inductor
to ground (see
was formed between the right-hand
Fig. 1(b)). The capacitor
ground plane and the rectangular patch beneath it.
Case 2 in Fig. 2 refers to the dual-band monopole antenna
with single-cell MTM loading. In Case 2, the feature of the

“defected” ground is temporarily removed, while the other geometrical parameters remain the same as the tri-band antenna
shown in Fig. 1(a). From Fig. 4, it can be observed that the
monopole antenna with this single unit-cell MTM loading exhibits dual-resonance characteristics [20]. The geometrical parameters, namely the size of the square patches underneath the
monopole patch and the length of the thin strip determine ,
and
shown in Fig. 3, respectively. They were adjusted in
order to obtain in-phase currents along the top monopole and
along the thin bottom strip at the resonant frequency around 6.0
GHz. When operating in the folded monopole mode, the antenna acts as a two-arm folded monopole along the -axis, similar to the four-arm folded monopole of [11]. As discussed in
[11], it is possible to eliminate the odd-mode currents along the
CPW feedline by adjusting the printed lumped elements, thus
enabling the -directed even-mode currents on the antenna to
radiate. This can be seen from the HFSS-simulated current distribution of Fig. 5(a).
In addition to the monopole resonance at around 5.0 GHz –
6.0 GHz, the metamaterial loading introduces a second resonance around 2.4 GHz – 2.5 GHz, which is desired for WiFi
applications. At this frequency, the antenna no longer acts as a
folded monopole along the -axis, but rather as a dipole oriented
along the -axis, as shown in Fig. 5(b), where the current path
was sketched from HFSS. Since the currents along the right edge
of the left ground-plane section are flowing against the currents
along the left edge of the right ground-plane section, only the
in-phase currents along the top edges of both the ground-plane
sections contribute to the radiation, which renders the groundplane as the main radiating element. The length of the current
, which is related to the size of the ground-plane,
path
determines the resonant frequency. This is verified by the simulation for a central-fed dipole shown in Fig. 6. In Fig. 6, the
equivalent dipole was simulated with the same substrate and the
. The resulting resonant frequency
same length of
is 2.42 GHz, which agrees with the dipole-mode resonance for
of the tri-band antenna shown in Fig. 4. Bethe simulated
sides, since the dipole-mode currents for the proposed design
are flowing in a meandered path, an even larger miniaturization
factor is achieved, compared to the loaded monopole antenna reported in [20] where the dipole-mode currents only flow along
the top edges of the ground-plane.

1034

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

weakly excited. The length of this current path is approximately
, which can be verified using an equivalent dipole simulation, similar to that shown in Fig. 6.
The dual-mode operation due to the metamaterial loading is,
indeed, verified by the HFSS simulation for Case 2 shown in
for
Fig. 2(b). As seen in Fig. 4, the simulated magnitude of
the monopole antenna with single-cell MTM reactive loading
(the dashed line) has a desired higher resonance at around 5.48
GHz which is lower than 6.0 GHz for Case 1 and covers the
) starting from 4.95 GHz to up to 7 GHz,
bandwidth (
while the lower resonance is centered at 2.46 GHz and has a
bandwidth of 90 MHz.
Fig. 7. HFSS-simulated current distribution at the intersection between the antenna terminal and the CPW feedline under the dipole mode of operation.

B. The “Defected” Ground-Plane Antenna
Ideally, the dipole mode would not be excited for the regular monopole antenna due to the symmetric current distribution
along the central line of the CPW feedline. In order to excite this
mode, a single unit cell of MTM reactive loading was utilized.
At low frequencies, the host transmission-line sections are very
short and can be considered negligible. Assuming that the feed
is placed at the base of the shunt inductor , the entire circuit is
simply transformed into a series resonator formed between the
and
and the loading inductors
and
loading capacitors
, as shown in Fig. 1(b). If the resonant frequency of the series resonator is designed to overlap with the dipole mode resonance of the antenna, it forms a short circuit and therefore forces
the in-phase currents along the -axis flowing from one side of
the ground to the other, through the path shown in Fig. 5(b).
This enables the ground-plane to radiate in a dipolar fashion,
which is orthogonal to the radiation at the higher frequencies.
Bearing in mind the design considerations discussed above, the
optimized loading patches have dimensions of 3.0 3.0
and 2.5 2.5
, respectively, and the two sections of thin
strips have the same length of 5.5 mm and width of 0.25 mm. In
addition, the position of the central line of the CPW inner conductor is tuned and placed 1.7 mm off from the central symmetry
line of the antenna, in order to obtain a good impedance match
to 50 , which in turn results in asymmetric ground-planes, as
shown in Fig. 1(a).
Since the currents need a path from one ground to the other,
an air bridge made of copper wires was placed at the intersection between the antenna terminal and the extended CPW feedline, in order to provide a shorting path. Additional air bridges
were placed at the CPW feed side and parallel to the first air
bridge, which ensure balanced currents and preserve the CPW
mode. Fig. 7 shows the transition of the currents from unbalanced to balanced at the terminal, where one can observe that
the majority of the unbalanced currents pass through the first
air bridge but after the third air bridge, they are effectively suppressed. It is worth mentioning that in practice, the CPW feed
with air bridges can be replaced with a conductor backed CPW
with a ground-via fence which offers the additional advantage
of lower EMI radiation.
dip around 3.6
Lastly, it can been seen that there is a small
GHz for Case 2 shown in Fig. 4. This corresponds to another resonant current path along the ground plane, which is nevertheless

In order to create the third resonance to meet the requirement for the WiMAX application (3.30 GHz – 3.80 GHz) in
the responses of the monopole antenna with the proposed reactive loading (Case 2 in Fig. 2(b)), a slot was cut out of the
antenna ground-plane, thus forming a defected ground-plane.
Similar to [22], an -shaped slot was chosen to achieve a longer
effective slot length, without having to increase the size of the
ground-plane. However, unlike having the slot cut at the top
edge of the ground [22], the proposed design has the slot cut
at the bottom edge, to avoid the discontinuity of the current
along the top edge of the ground-plane, which contributes to the
while
dipole-mode radiation. The width of the slot is
and
, were
the vertical and horizontal length of the slot,
adjusted in order to achieve a good impedance match throughout
the WiMAX band. This leads to the final design topology as
shown in Fig. 2(c). It can be seen from Fig. 4 (solid line) that
inserting the -shaped slot provides the third resonance around
3.5 GHz for the WiMAX band, while the dual-mode operation
for the WiFi bands at around 2.5 GHz and 6.0 GHz is preserved.
The resonance due to the slot can be explained by observing
the surface current distribution on the conductors of the antenna, as shown in Fig. 8. As can be seen, there is a strong
concentration of the currents along the -shaped slot on the
left ground-plane. The slot forces the current to wrap around
it and thus creates an alternate path for the current on the left
at its resoground-plane, whose length is approximately
nance. It is also noted from Fig. 8 that the -shaped slot does not
significantly affect the balanced CPW mode, since it is placed
far enough away from the CPW. Even if there were a minimal
amount of unbalanced current, it would be eliminated by the air
bridges applied at the intersection between the antenna and the
extended CPW feedline, as shown in Fig. 7.
for a parametric
Fig. 9 shows the simulated magnitude of
. It can be observed
study of the length of the horizontal slot
that the horizontal cut has a large influence on exciting the slot
, which refers to the case that there is
mode. When
only a vertical slot cut from the bottom, the slot mode is barely
excited, compared with the simulated parameter characteristics in the case without a “defected” ground (Case 2) in Fig. 4.
Moreover, it can be seen that the vertical slot cut from the bottom
doesn’t affect the folded monopole and dipole modes. As
is
gradually increased, a better impedance match is achieved over

ZHU et al.: A COMPACT TRI-BAND MONOPOLE ANTENNA WITH SINGLE-CELL METAMATERIAL LOADING

1035

Fig. 10. The fabricated prototype of the tri-band monopole antenna with singlecell MTM loading and a “defected” ground-plane. (a) Front side. (b) Back side.

Fig. 8. HFSS-simulated surface current distribution on the conductors of the
tri-band monopole antenna with single-cell MTM loading and a “defected”
ground-plane at the resonant frequency of 3.76 GHz.

Fig. 11. Measured and HFSS simulated jS j for the proposed tri-band
monopole antenna with single-cell MTM loading and a “defected” ground.

Fig. 9. Simulated jS j of the tri-band monopole antenna with single-cell
MTM loading and a “defected” ground-plane for the different lengths of the
horizontal slot L .

the WiMAX band, while the performances of the monopole and
dipole modes are both preserved.
The final design of the tri-band monopole antenna with
single-cell MTM reactive loading and a “defected” ground
is shown in Fig. 1. The geometrical parameters were determined based on the previous discussion and were fine-tuned
in order to meet the WiFi and WiMAX bands requirements. As shown in Fig. 1, the full size of the tri-band
monopole antenna (including the ground-plane with the size
) is 20.0 mm 23.5
of
, with respect to
mm 1.59 mm, or
the lowest resonant frequency of 2.45 GHz. The compact size
and the tri-band performance of the antenna make it a good
candidate for emerging WLAN applications.
III. SIMULATION AND EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The tri-band monopole antenna was fabricated and tested.
The fabricated prototype is shown in Fig. 10, and the measured
from HFSS are shown in
versus the simulated magnitude of
bandwidth of
Fig. 11. The antenna exhibits a simulated
80 MHz for the lower WiFi band from 2.40 GHz to 2.48 GHz

and a bandwidth from 5.13 GHz to beyond 7 GHz for the higher
bandwidth of 590 MHz
WiFi band. It also exhibits a
for the WiMAX band from 3.30 GHz to 3.89 GHz. The performances beyond 7 GHz are out of the scope of our interest for
bandWiFi and WiMAX applications. The measured
width is 90 MHz from 2.42 GHz to 2.51 GHz for the lower WiFi
band, and from 5.20 GHz to beyond 7 GHz for the second WiFi
band. The measured bandwidth for the WiMAX band is 620
MHz from 3.35 GHz to 3.97 GHz. The simulated results and
the measured results show good agreement.
The simulated and measured radiation patterns for the
proposed tri-band monopole antenna with single-cell MTM
reactive loading and a “defected” ground-plane are plotted in
Figs. 12–14 for the three principle planes at the frequencies
of 5.50 GHz, 2.45 GHz and 3.50 GHz, respectively, where
good agreement between the simulations and measurements
can be observed. Fig. 12 shows the radiation patterns at 5.50
GHz for the -plane ( -plane and -plane) and the -plane
( -plane). The fact that the antenna exhibits radiation patterns
with a horizontal -directed linear E-field polarization, verifies
that the antenna operates in a folded monopole mode around
5.50 GHz, due to the -directed in-phase currents along the
monopole and the thin vertical inductive strip, as shown in
Fig. 5(a). The -directed currents along the thin horizontal
inductive strip have a contribution to the cross polarization
in the -plane. It can also be seen that at this frequency, the
slot on the left ground has a minimum contribution to the
radiation since the currents are dominated by the -directed

1036

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

Fig. 12. Measured and simulated radiation patterns for the tri-band monopole antenna with single-cell MTM loading and a “defected” ground-plane at 5.50 GHz.
Solid line: measured co-polarization, dashed black line: simulated co-polarization, solid blue line: measured cross-polarization, and dash-dot black line: simulated
cross-polarization. (a) xz -plane. (b) yz -plane. (c) xy -plane.

Fig. 13. Measured and simulated radiation patterns for the tri-band monopole antenna with single-cell MTM loading and a “defected” ground-plane at 2.45 GHz.
Solid line: measured co-polarization, dashed black line: simulated co-polarization, solid blue line: measured cross-polarization, and dash-dot black line: simulated
cross-polarization. (a) xz -plane. (b) yz -plane. (c) xy -plane.

Fig. 14. Measured and simulated radiation patterns for the tri-band monopole antenna with single-cell MTM loading and a “defected” ground-plane at 3.50 GHz.
Solid line: measured co-polarization, dashed black line: simulated co-polarization, solid blue line: measured cross-polarization, and dash-dot black line: simulated
cross-polarization. (a) xz -plane. (b) yz -plane. (c) xy -plane.

ones along the monopole. At this frequency, the simulated
radiation efficiency is 85.9%, which is in good agreement
with the measured efficiency of 85.3%, using the Wheeler Cap
method [23]. The Wheeler cap measurements were conducted
according to the method described in [23], where the measured

data in free-space and within the Wheeler cap were rotated on
the Smith chart in order to obtain purely real values for the input
resistance at resonance. The sphere used in the measurements
is shown in Fig. 8 of [11], together with the pertinent details of
its size. For this size Wheeler cap, its resonant frequency was

ZHU et al.: A COMPACT TRI-BAND MONOPOLE ANTENNA WITH SINGLE-CELL METAMATERIAL LOADING

1037

TABLE I
SIMULATED AND MEASURED GAIN AND RADIATION EFFICIENCY FOR THE TRI-BAND MONOPOLE ANTENNA
WITH SINGLE-CELL MTM LOADING AND A “DEFECTED” GROUND-PLANE

calculated to be 0.69 GHz, which is well below the operating
range of the tri-band antenna. Therefore, during the efficiency
measurements at the three distinct resonant frequencies, special
attention was paid in order to avoid any of the cavity resonances
by slightly re-adjusting the position of the antenna within the
Wheeler cap. Since the antenna was completely enclosed by the
Wheeler-cap sphere during the measurements, this eliminated
any potential radiation from the feed cable.
At 2.45 GHz, the -directed currents contribute to the radiation, as shown in Fig. 5(b). This is consistent with the radiation patterns measured at the same frequency shown in Fig. 13.
The radiation patterns in the -plane and the -plane, which
correspond to the two -planes of the ground-plane radiating
mode, indicate that the structure radiates in a dipolar fashion
at this frequency. Similar to [20], there is, however, a partial
filling of the null around 90 in the -plane, that can be attributed to constructive interference from the -directed currents
along the CPW and the vertical thin inductive strip, and also the
-directed current around the slot on the left ground-plane. This
additional current also manifests itself in the cross-polarization
direction, as can be seen in
data of the -plane in the
Fig. 13(b). In the -plane, which corresponds to the -plane of
the radiating ground-plane, the radiation pattern is as expected
omnidirectional. Therefore, at 2.45 GHz, the antenna exhibits
a -directed linear -field polarized radiation pattern. It is orthogonal to the one observed at 5.50 GHz, which verifies the
in-phase -directed currents across the ground. The simulated
and measured efficiencies are 69.8% and 67.4%, respectively,
which show good agreement.
Fig. 14 shows the radiation patterns at 3.50 GHz. Since the
-shaped slot which is cut out of the left ground-plane results
in meandered currents along both the -direction and the -direction, which have independent contributions to the radiation,
it is observed from Fig. 14 that the antenna exhibits two linear
electric fields that are orthogonally polarized in both the and
directions. Additionally, the axial ratio attains values close to,
but greater than, one around the
broadside direction, indicating circular polarization behavior. The measured efficiency
at this frequency is 86.3%, compared to a simulated efficiency
of 88.2% at the same frequency.
The measured and simulated gain and radiation efficiency
values, at the frequencies of 2.45, 3.50, and 5.50 GHz, are summarized in Table I.
IV. CONCLUSION
A tri-band and compact monopole antenna is proposed, that
can be used for WiFi and WiMAX applications. The antenna
consists of a regular CPW-fed printed monopole antenna with
the embedded features of metamaterial-based single-cell reactive loading and a “defected” ground-plane, which introduce an-

other two resonances at the lower frequencies, in addition to
the monopole resonance. The theoretical performance is verified
by full-wave simulations and experimental data. The fabricated
provides a
prototype with a size of
90 MHz (
) bandwidth from 2.42 GHz to 2.51 GHz for
the IEEE 802.11b/g/n standard (lower WiFi band) and a broad
band from 5.20 GHz to beyond 7 GHz for the IEEE 802.11a/n
standard (upper WiFi band), and also a bandwidth of 620 MHz
from 3.35 GHz to 3.97 GHz for the WiMAX band. The antenna exhibits dipole-like and monopole-like radiation patterns
within the lower and upper WiFi bands, respectively, which are
orthogonal to each other. The radiation patterns at the WiMAX
band exhibit two orthogonal linear E-field polarizations as expected. Reasonable radiation efficiencies, in the range of 70%
– 90%, are obtained for all three bands. Fed by the CPW transmission-line, the proposed antenna can be easily integrated with
CPW-based microwave circuits. These attributes make the proposed antenna well suited for emerging wireless applications.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank T.V. C.T. Chan at the University of Toronto for assisting in the measurement of the prototype
antenna. Financial support from Intel corporation is gratefully
acknowledged.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Ge, K. Esselle, and T. Bird, “Compact triple-arm multiband
monopole antenna,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop on: Antenna Technology Small Antennas and Novel Metamaterials, Mar. 2006, pp.
172–175.
[2] S. Yang, C. Zhang, H. K. Pan, A. E. Fathy, and V. K. Nair, “Frequencyreconfigurable antennas for multiradio wireless platforms,” IEEE Microw. Mag., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 66–83, Feb. 2009.
[3] S. Yang, A. E. Fathy, S. El-Ghazaly, H. K. Pan, and V. K. Nair, “A
novel hybrid reconfigurable multi-band antenna for universal wireless
receivers,” presented at the Electromagnetic Theory Symp., Jul. 2007.
[4] G. V. Eleftheriades, A. K. Iyer, and P. C. Kremer, “Planar negative
refractive index media using periodically loaded transmission lines,”
IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2702–2712,
Dec. 2002.
[5] G. V. Eleftheriades and K. G. Balmain, Negative-Refraction Metamaterials: Fundamental Principles and Applications. Hoboken/Piscataway, NJ: Wiley/IEEE Press, 2005.
[6] C. Caloz and T. Itoh, “Novel microwave devices and structures based
on the transmission-line approach of meta-materials,” in Proc. IEEE
MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp., Jun. 2003, pp. 195–198.
[7] G. V. Eleftheriades, “Enabling RF/microwave devices using negativerefractive-index transmission-line (NRI-TL) metamaterials,” IEEE Antennas Propag. Mag., vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 34–51, Apr. 2007.
[8] G. V. Eleftheriades, A. Grbic, and M. Antoniades, “Negative-refractive-index transmission-line metamaterials and enabling electromagnetic applications,” in IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society Int.
Symp. Digest, Jun. 2004, pp. 1399–1402.
[9] A. Sanada, M. Kimura, H. Kubo, C. Caloz, and T. Itoh, “A planar zeroth order resonator antenna using a left-handed transmission line,” in
Proc. 34th Eur. Microwave Conf. (EuMC), Amsterdam, The Netherlands, Oct. 2004, pp. 1341–1344.

1038

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

[10] F. Qureshi, M. A. Antoniades, and G. V. Eleftheriades, “A compact
and low-profile metamaterial ring antenna with vertical polarization,”
IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 4, pp. 333–336, 2005.
[11] M. A. Antoniades and G. V. Eleftheriades, “A folded-monopole model
for electrically small NRI-TL metamaterial antennas,” IEEE Antennas
Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 7, pp. 425–428, 2008.
[12] J. Zhu and G. V. Eleftheriades, “A compact transmission-line metamaterial antenna with extended bandwidth,” IEEE Antennas Wireless
Propag. Lett., vol. 8, pp. 295–298, 2009.
[13] R. W. Ziolkowski and A. Erentok, “Metamaterial-based efficient electrically small antennas,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 54, pp.
2113–2130, Jul. 2006.
[14] A. Erentok and R. W. Ziolkowski, “Metamaterial-inspired efficient
electrically small antennas,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 56,
pp. 691–707, Mar. 2008.
[15] R. W. Ziolkowski, “An efficient, electrically small antenna designed for
VHF and UHF applications,” IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett.,
vol. 7, pp. 217–220, 2008.
[16] A. Lai, K. Leong, and T. Itoh, “Infinite wavelength resonant antennas
with monopolar radiation pattern based on periodic structures,” IEEE
Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 55, pp. 868–876, Mar. 2007.
[17] J.-G. Lee and J.-H. Lee, “Zeroth order resonance loop antenna,” IEEE
Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 55, pp. 994–997, Mar. 2007.
[18] J. Zhu and G. V. Eleftheriades, “Dual-band metamaterial-inspired
small monopole antenna for WiFi applications,” Electron. Lett., vol.
45, no. 22, pp. 1104–1106, Oct. 2009.
[19] C.-J. Lee, K. Leong, and T. Itoh, “Composite right/left-handed transmission line based compact resonant antennas for RF module integration,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 54, pp. 2283–2291, Aug.
2006.
[20] M. A. Antoniades and G. V. Eleftheriades, “A broadband dual-mode
monopole antenna using NRI-TL metamaterial loading,” IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 8, pp. 258–261, 2009.
[21] J. Zhu, M. A. Antoniades, and G. V. Eleftheriades, “A tri-band compact metamaterial-loaded monopole antenna for WiFi and WiMAX applications,” presented at the IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society
Int. Symp., Jun. 2009.
[22] M. A. Antoniades and G. V. Eleftheriades, “A compact multi-band
monopole antenna with a defected ground plane,” IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 7, pp. 652–655, 2008.
[23] W. E. McKinzie, III, “A modified wheeler cap method for measuring
antenna efficiency,” in Proc. IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society
Int. Symp., Jul. 1997, pp. 542–545.
Jiang Zhu (S’06) received the B.Eng. degree in
electrical engineering from Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China, in 2003 and the M.A.Sc. degree
in electrical engineering from McMaster University,
Hamilton, ON, Canada, in 2006. He is currently
working toward the Ph.D. degree at the University
of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
In August 2003, he joined the Positioning and
Wireless Technology Center, Nanyang Technological
University, Singapore. From 2004 to 2006, he was
a Research Assistant with the Computational Electromagnetics Research Laboratory and the Simulation Optimization Systems
Research Laboratory, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
McMaster University. He joined the Electromagnetics Group, University of
Toronto, in September 2006, where he is currently a Research Assistant and
Teaching Assistant. His research interests are electromagnetic metamaterials,
small antennas, microwave computer-aided design and microwave imaging.
Mr. Zhu is the recipient of IEEE Antenna and Propagation Society Doctoral
Research Awards for 2008–2009 and the Chinese Government Award for Outstanding Self-Financed Student Abroad 2008.

Marco A. Antoniades (S’99–M’09) received the
B.A.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from the
University of Waterloo, ON, Canada, in 2001,
and the M.A.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical
engineering from the University of Toronto, ON,
Canada, in 2003 and 2009, respectively.
From 1997 to 2001, he worked for various
telecom/engineering companies, including Spacebridge, Cisco, Honeywell, Ericsson, The Cyprus
Telecommunications Authority and Westinghouse,
as part of the work-experience program at the
University of Waterloo. From 2001 to 2009, he was a teaching assistant at
the University of Toronto, where he contributed to the design and teaching of
undergraduate courses relating to electromagnetics. During the same period,
he was a research assistant at the University of Toronto, where he was involved
in the development of microwave devices and antennas based on negative-refractive-index transmission-line (NRI-TL) metamaterials. Currently, he is
a Postdoctoral Fellow at the University of Toronto, pursuing his research
interests in antenna design and miniaturization, RF/microwave circuits and
devices, periodic electromagnetic structures and negative-refractive-index
metamaterials.
Dr. Antoniades was a recipient of the Edward S. Rogers Sr. Graduate Scholarship from the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Toronto for 2003/04 and 2004/05. He received the first prize in the
Student Paper Competition at the 2006 IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society
(AP-S) International Symposium in Albuquerque, NM. In 2009, he was the recipient of the Ontario Post-Doctoral Fellowship from the Ministry of Research
and Innovation of Ontario.

George V. Eleftheriades (S’86–M’88–SM’02–
F’06) received the Diploma in Electrical Engineering from the National Technical University
of Athens, Greece in 1988 and the M.S.E.E. and
Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, in 1989 and
1993, respectively.
From 1994 to 1997, he was with the Swiss Federal
Institute of Technology in Lausanne. Currently, he is
a Professor in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, where he
holds a combined Canada Research Chair/Velma M. Rogers Graham Chair in
Engineering. His research interests include transmission-line and other electromagnetic metamaterials, small antennas and components for wireless communications, plasmonic and nanoscale optical components and structures, fundamental electromagnetic theory and electromagnetic design of high-speed interconnects.
Prof. Eleftheriades received the Ontario Premier’s Research Excellence
Award in 2001 and an E.W.R. Steacie Fellowship from the Natural Sciences
and Engineering Research Council of Canada in 2004. He served as an IEEE
AP-S Distinguished Lecturer during the period 2004–2009. Amongst his other
scholarly achievements he is the recipient of the 2008 IEEE Kiyo Tomiyasu
Technical Field Award “for pioneering contributions to the science and technological applications of negative-refraction electromagnetic materials.” He
is an IEEE Fellow and has been elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of
Canada in 2009. He serves as an elected member of the IEEE AP-S AdCom
and as an Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND
PROPAGATION. He is a member of the Technical Coordination Committee
MTT-15 (Microwave Field Theory). He is the general chair of the IEEE
AP-S/URSI 2010 Int. Symposium to be held in Toronto Canada in July 2010.

