IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

1269

Invasive Weed Optimization and its Features in
Electromagnetics
Shaya Karimkashi, Student Member, IEEE, and Ahmed A. Kishk, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—A new numerical stochastic optimization algorithm,
inspired from colonizing weeds, is proposed for Electromagnetic
applications. This algorithm, invasive weed optimization (IWO),
is described and applied to different electromagnetic problems.
The linear array antenna synthesis, the standard problem used
by antenna engineers, is presented as an example for the application of the IWO. Compared to the PSO, The features of the IWO
are shown. As another application, the design of aperiodic thinned
array antennas by optimizing the number of elements and at the
same time their positions is presented. By implementing this new
scenario, thinned arrays with less number of elements and lower
sidelobes, compared to the results achieved by genetic algorithm
(GA) for the same aperture dimensions, are obtained. Finally, the
IWO is applied to a U-slot patch antenna to have the desired dualband characteristics.
Index Terms—Antenna arrays, aperiodic arrays, microstrip
patch antenna, optimization method, thinned arrays.

optimizers like PSO, but also is capable of handling some new
electromagnetic optimization problems.
The main purpose of this paper is to introduce the desirable
attributes and new features of the IWO for Electromagnetic
problems. Of course, the efficiency of this optimization method
compared to the other optimizers depends on the problem and
choosing control parameters. Below, we first represent the
proposed IWO algorithm and its desirable features. Then, by
conducting several array antenna synthesis problems, including
linear and thinned array antennas, the efficiency and specific
features of this new algorithm are shown. Finally, the method
is employed in designing a U-slot microstrip patch antenna
fed by an L-probe to have the desired reflection coefficient for
dual-band applications.
II. IWO

I. INTRODUCTION
A. The Inspiration Phenomenon
LECTROMAGNETIC designing problems usually involve several parameters which are non-linearly related
to the objective functions. In order to solve these problems
efficiently, evolutionary optimization algorithms have been
considered and successfully applied to electromagnetic problems. Among these optimizers, genetic algorithm (GA) [1] and
particle swarm optimization (PSO) [2] have received considerable attentions by the electromagnetic community due to their
efficiency and simplicity [3]–[6]. In addition, other optimization methods including Ant Colony Optimizer (ACO) [7] and
simulated annealing (SA) [8] have shown high capability of
searching for global minimum in electromagnetic optimization
problems [9]–[13].
Here, a new optimization algorithm, invasive weed optimization (IWO) and mainly some of its new features are
introduced by illustrating its applications to various electromagnetic problems. This numerical stochastic optimization
algorithm, inspired from weed colonization, was first introduced by Mehrabian and Lucus in 2006 [14]. It is shown that
this optimizer not only in certain instances outperforms other

E

Manuscript received April 20, 2009; revised July 27, 2009. Date of manuscript acceptance October 01, 2009; date of publication February 05, 2010; date
of current version April 07, 2010. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant ECS-524293.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University
of Mississippi, University, MI 38677 USA (e-mail: skarimka@olemiss.edu;
s.karimkashi@gmail.com; ahmed@olemiss.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TAP.2010.2041163

The IWO, inspired from the phenomenon of colonization of
invasive weeds in nature, is based on weed biology and ecology.
It has been shown that capturing the properties of the invasive
weeds, leads to a powerful optimization algorithm. The behavior
of weed colonization in a cropping field can be explained as
follows:
Weeds invade a cropping system (field) by means of dispersal and occupy opportunity spaces between the crops. Each
invading weed takes the unused resources in the field and grows
to a flowering weed and produces new weeds, independently.
The number of new weeds produced by each flowering weed
depends on the fitness of that flowering weed in the colony.
Those weeds that have better adoption to the environment and
take more unused resources grow faster and produce more seeds.
The new produced weeds are randomly spread over the field and
grow to flowering weeds. This process continues till the maximum number of weeds is reached on the field due to the limited
resources. Now, only those weeds with better fitness can survive
and produce new weeds. This competitive contest between the
weeds causes them to become well adapted and improved over
the time.
B. Algorithm
Before considering the algorithm process, the new key terms
used to describe this algorithm should be introduced. Table I
shows some of these terms. Each individual or agent, a set containing a value of each optimization variable, is called a seed.
Each seed grows to a flowering plant in the colony. The meaning
of a plant is one individual or agent after evaluating its fitness.

0018-926X/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE

1270

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

TABLE I
SOME OF THE KEY TERMS USED IN THE IWO

Therefore, growing a seed to a plant corresponds to evaluating
an agent’s fitness.
To simulate the colonizing behavior of weeds the following
steps, pictorially shown in Fig. 1, are considered.
parameters (variables) that need to be
1. First of all, the
optimized should be selected. Then, for each of these variables in the -dimensional solution space, a maximum and
minimum value should be assigned (defining the solution
space).
2. A finite number of seeds are being randomly dispread over
the defined solution space. In other words, each seed takes a
random position in the N-dimensional problem space. Each
seed’s position is an initial solution, containing N values
for the N variables, of the optimization problem (initialize
a population).
3. Each initial seed grows to a flowering plant. That is, the fitness function, defined to represent the goodness of the solution, returns a fitness value for each seed. After assigning
the fitness value to the corresponding seed, it is called a
plant (Evaluate the fitness of each individual).
4. Before the flowering plants produce new seeds, they are
ranked based on their assigned fitness values. Then, each
flowering plant is allowed to produce seeds depending on
its ranking in the colony. In other words, the number of
seeds each plant produces depends on its fitness value or
ranking and increases from the minimum possible seeds
, to its maximum,
. Those seeds that
production,
solve the problem better correspond to the plants which
are more adapted to the colony and consequently produce
more seeds. This step adds an important property to the
algorithm by allowing all of the plants to participate in the
reproduction contest (Rank the population and reproduce
new seeds).
5. The produced seeds in this step are being dispread over
the search space by normally distributed random numbers
with mean equal to the location of the producing plants and
varying standard deviations. The standard deviation (SD)
at the present time step can be expressed by

(1)
is the maximum number of iterations.
and
are defined initial and final standard
deviations, respectively and is the nonlinear modulation
index. Fig. 2 shows the standard deviation (SD) over the
where

Fig. 1. Flow Chart showing the IWO algorithm.

Fig. 2. Standard deviation over the course of the run.

course of a run with 100 iterations and different modulation indexes. It can be seen that the SD is reduced from
the initial SD to the final SD with different velocities. The
algorithm starts with such a high initial SD that the optimizer can explore through the whole solution space. By
increasing the number of iterations, SD value is decreased
gradually to search around the local minima or maxima to
find the global optimal solution (dispersion).
6. After that all seeds have found their positions over the
search area, the new seeds grow to the flowering plants
and then, they are ranked together with their parents. Plants
with lower ranking in the colony are eliminated to reach
. It is
the maximum number of plants in the colony,
obvious that the number of fitness evaluations, the population size, is more than the maximum number of plants in
the colony (competitive exclusion).
7. Survived plants can produce new seeds based on their
ranking in the colony. The process is repeated at step 3 till
either the maximum number of iteration is reached or the
fitness criterion is met (repeat).
C. Selection of Control Parameter Values
Among the parameters affect the convergence of the algorithm three parameters, the initial SD,
, the final SD,
, and the nonlinear modulation index, , should be tuned
carefully in order to achieve the proper value of the SD in each
iteration, according to (1). A high initial standard deviation
should be chosen to allow the algorithm to explore the whole
search area, aggressively. It seems that the IWO works well if
the initial SD is set around a few percent (1 to 5 percent) of the

KARIMKASHI AND KISHK: INVASIVE WEED OPTIMIZATION AND ITS FEATURES IN ELECTROMAGNETICS

dynamic range of each variable. The final SD should be selected
carefully to allow the optimizer to find the optimal solution
as accurate as possible. A finer local optimum solution can be
achieved by decreasing this parameter. However, it should be
noticed that tuning the final SD much smaller than the precision
criteria of the optimization variables, doesn’t improve the final
error level and may deteriorate the convergence rate of the
optimization. Therefore, the final SD in each dimension should
be selected based on the precision effect of that variable on the
objective function. It was shown that the value of nonlinear
modulation index has a considerable effect on the performance
of IWO [14]. It was suggested that the best choice for is 3.
Besides (1), other functions to describe the standard deviation
over the optimization process were considered. However, simis the best choice.
ulation results showed that (1) with
Maximum and minimum numbers of seeds are the two other
important parameters needed to be selected. Based on different
examples, it can be concluded that selecting the maximum
number of seed between 3 and 5 leads to a good performance
of the optimizer. Moreover, the minimum number of seeds is
set to zero for all examples.
The maximum number of plants is another parameter that
should be chosen in the IWO. Parametric studies show that
increasing this parameter not necessarily increases the performance of the algorithm. It was found that the best performance
can be achieved for many problems when the maximum number
of plant is set between 10 and 20.
III. IWO FEATURES
One important property of the IWO is that it allows all of
the agents or plants to participate in the reproduction process.
Fitter plants produce more seeds than less fit plants, which tends
to improve the convergence of the algorithm. Furthermore, it is
possible that some of the plants with the lower fitness carry more
useful information compared to the fitter plants. This algorithm,
the IWO, gives a chance to the less fit plants to reproduce and
if the seeds produced by them have good finesses in the colony,
they can survive.
Another important feature of IWO is that weeds reproduce
without mating. Each weed can produce new seeds, independently. This property adds a new attribute to the algorithm that
each agent may have different number of variables during the
optimization process. Thus, the number of variables can be
chosen as one of the optimization parameters in this algorithm.
Optimizing the number of variables gives such an interesting
feature to the optimization that can handle some new electromagnetic design problems. The effectivity of this kind of
optimization for designing aperiodic thinned array antennas is
shown in Section V.
Finally, comparing some aspects of the IWO with two
common and standard optimizers, GA and PSO, can clarify
some features of this new algorithm. Provided that the number
of iterations and the population size are considered as common
requirements for all evolutionary algorithms, the initial and
final standard deviation, nonlinear modulation index, and maximum and minimum number of seeds are the parameter of the
IWO need to be tuned. In the GA, crossover and mutation rates

1271

and in the PSO, inertial weight, , cognitive rate, , social
, should be controlled
rate, , and the maximum velocity,
to achieve the desired convergence. It has been shown that the
choice of boundary conditions and also the maximum velocity
are critical in convergence of the PSO algorithm [15]–[17].
Moreover, in the case of GA, both crossover and mutation
rates affects the convergence of the problem [18]. The effect
of these tuning parameters on the GA and PSO convergences
are difficult to perceive, but by tuning the critical parameters
in the IWO, the initial and final SD, a high-level control in the
convergence and accuracy of the algorithm is achieved [19],
[20]. In addition, the IWO shows a high stability with different
boundary conditions.
IV. ARRAY ANTENNA DESIGN PROBLEMS
In this section, both the IWO and PSO are applied to the
problem of synthesizing the far-field radiation patterns of linear
array antennas. The consideration focuses on the optimizing of
array antennas to achieve the desired radiation patterns given by
elements,
user defined functions. For an array antenna with
separated by a uniform distance , the normalized array factor
is given by
(2)
Where
are amplitude coefficients, is the angle from the
is the maximum value of
normal to the array axis, and
the magnitude of the array factor. is assumed to be
, where
is the wavelength.
Comparisons are made between the performances of the
IWO and the PSO in achieving desired radiation patterns. In the
case of the IWO, restricted and invisible boundary conditions
are two possible choices. The restricted boundary condition
relocates the particle on the boundary that the particle hits.
However, the invisible boundary condition allows a particle to
stay outside the solution space while the fitness evaluation of
that particle is skipped and a bad fitness value is assigned to that
errant particle. For the case of the PSO, the boundary conditions
including invisible (IBC), reflective (RBC), absorbing (ABC),
damping (DBC), invisible/reflecting and invisible/damping
are tested [16]. In addition, the velocity-clipping technique,
showing good performance in the PSO, for different
values are implemented [9], [15].
The same number of population size and iterations are
chosen for different algorithms. The population size is fixed
to 40 for both algorithms. It should be noted that in the case
of the IWO, the number of population is fixed by choosing
the maximum number of plant population and also minimum
and maximum number of seeds. In the coming examples, the
maximum number of plants is fixed to 10 and the number of
seeds increases linearly from 0 to 5. In the case of PSO, both the
and the social rate
are set to 2.0 and the
cognitive rate
inertial weight is varied linearly from 0.9 to 0.2 as suggested in
[9], [17]. It should be also pointed out that various realizations
of the same experiment produced results that are close to each
other. All results reported are the average of 50 independent
runs of the PSO or IWO algorithms and found to be sufficient.

1272

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

TABLE II
IWO PARAMETER VALUES FOR THE LINEAR 40-ELEMENT ARRAY
OPTIMIZATION

TABLE III
COMPARISON OF AVERAGE NUMBER OF FITNESS EVALUATIONS REQUIRED PER
SUCCESSFUL RUN IN THE PSO AND THE IWO ALGORITHMS FOR THE LINEAR
40-ELEMENT ARRAY OPTIMIZATION

Fig. 3. Amplitude-only synthesis for a linear 40-element array (a) radiation
pattern obtained using IWO, (b) convergence curves for the IWO and PSO with
different boundary conditions. The maximum velocity limit is changed for the
PSO, (c) convergence curves for the IWO with restricted boundary condition
and different values of initial and final standard deviations.

A. Optimizing Sidelobe Patterns
In this section a linear 40-element array is considered to
achieve the desired radiation pattern by optimizing the amplitude coefficients. The objective pattern is to obtain side lobe
levels less than a tapered sidelobe mask that decreases linearly

from
to
. The beamwidth of the array pattern
is 11 and the number of sampling points is 359. It should
be pointed out that “Don’t exceed criterion” is utilized in the
formulation of the objective function. That is, an error will be
reported only if the obtained array factor exceeds the desired
sidelobe levels.
Fig. 3(a) shows the desired and obtained radiation patterns
achieved by the IWO. Since the desired envelope is symmetric,
we exploit the symmetry of the current distribution. Thus, the
number of optimization parameters reduces to the half of the
array elements. The parameters used for the IWO are summarized in Table II. The performance of the IWO compared to the
PSO for different boundary conditions is shown in Fig. 3(b).
It can be seen that the performance of the PSO is dramatically
changed by choosing either different boundary conditions or
changing the maximum velocity. Moreover, the algorithm is
trapped in a local minimum when the absorbing boundary
condition is used while IWO achieves better performance for
both invisible and restricted boundary conditions. The PSO
algorithm tested by some other boundary conditions [16], [17]
doesn’t show any better performances. The average numbers
of fitness evaluations required per successful run for both the
IWO and PSO with different boundary conditions are shown
in Table III. It can be seen that the IWO is faster than the
PSO to achieve the same optimization goal for this problem. It
should be mentioned that the 50 independent runs of the same
experiment for each curve of the IWO algorithm are closer too
each other compared to those for the PSO. These results are
removed for brevity.
The performance of the IWO for different standard deviations
is shown in Fig. 3(c). Different initial and final standard deviations are tried for IWO with the restricted boundary condition to
evaluate the performance of this algorithm. It can be observed
that by changing these parameters, the performance of the algorithm is slightly changed. Thus, by applying different boundary
conditions or different standard deviation parameters, the IWO
shows more stability compared to the PSO.

KARIMKASHI AND KISHK: INVASIVE WEED OPTIMIZATION AND ITS FEATURES IN ELECTROMAGNETICS

1273

TABLE IV
COMPARISON OF AVERAGE NUMBER OF FITNESS EVALUATIONS REQUIRED PER
SUCCESSFUL RUN IN PSO AND IWO ALGORITHMS FOR THE LINEAR SHAPED
BEAM SYNTHESIS OPTIMIZATION

sidelobes region. Therefore, the objective is to obtain sidelobes
levels less than the mask in the sidelobes region and main beam
equal to the mask in the main beam region. The beamwidth
of the array pattern is 20 degrees and the number of sampling
points is 719.
The desired and obtained radiation patterns by using the
IWO are shown in Fig. 4(a). The same optimization parameters,
shown in Table II, are used for this synthesis problem, except
the number of iterations which is set to 2000. The convergence
curves for both the IWO with different boundary conditions and
the PSO with reflective boundary condition (RBC) and different
maximum velocities are shown in Fig. 4(b). It can be seen that
the IWO convergence curves for both restricted and invisible
boundary conditions converge to the same level. However, In
the case of the PSO, by varying the maximum velocity limit,
the performance of algorithm dramatically changes. Although
in some cases the PSO is faster in convergence compared to
the IWO, it traps in local minima. In addition, the 50 various
realizations of the same experiment for each curve of the
IWO algorithm are closer too each other compared to those
for the PSO. Table IV shows the average numbers of fitness
evaluations per successful run for both the IWO and PSO. The
effect of varying the initial and final standard deviations on the
convergence of the IWO with invisible boundary condition is
shown in Fig. 4(c). It can be seen that by varying the initial
SD, the convergence rate of the algorithm is improved and
compete with the results obtained by PSO in the first number of
iterations. However, neither the initial nor the final SD has any
critical effect on the final error level. The IWO appears to be
more stable since by applying different boundary conditions or
different initial or final standard deviation values, the convergence speed or the level of the cost function doesn’t change too
much. Therefore, the IWO doesn’t need much effort on tuning
the parameters.
Fig. 4. Amplitude and phase synthesis for a linear 50-element array (a) radiation pattern obtained using IWO, (b) convergence curves for the IWO with different boundary conditions and PSO with reflective boundary condition (RBC)
and different maximum velocity limit, (c) convergence curves for the IWO with
invisible boundary condition and different number of initial and final standard
deviations.

B. Shaped Beam Synthesis
The amplitude and phase optimization of a linear 50-element
array antenna to achieve the desired radiation pattern is considered. Shaping the main beam requires minimizing the absolute
difference between the desired and obtained radiation pattern.
Meanwhile, the “Don’t Exceed” criterion is considered in the

V. THINNED ARRAY ANTENNA
In this section, thinned planar array antennas are considered
as the next optimization problem to show the effectivity and
some special features of the IWO. By some modifications in the
IWO, the number of elements and the position of those elements
can be optimized which results in a new scenario for developing
thinned arrays. By applying this scenario, planar thinned arrays
with less number of elements and higher efficiencies are obtained.
Thinned arrays, generally produced by removing certain elements from a fully populated half wavelength spaced array, are

1274

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

usually designed to generate low sidelobe levels. Different optimization algorithms including GA, PSO, Simulated Annealing
and Ant Colony have been applied to remove the elements in
such a way to have the lowest possible sidelobe levels [19]–[26].
Although, the thinned arrays obtained by using these algorithms
produce low sidelobes levels, it has been shown that by considering the aperiodic arrangements, lower sidelobes levels can
be achieved. This can be done by optimizing the inter-element
spacing of periodic arrays or already thinned arrays to have
lower sidelobes levels [20], [21], [27]–[30].
In this section, by some modifications in the IWO, the number
of elements and at the same time their locations, the inter-element spacing, are optimized. It is shown that by using this algorithm, capable of optimizing such a problem, lower sidelobes
levels with less number of elements can be achieved. Fewer elements for a given aperture mean reducing the cost and weight
of the antenna system. It should be pointed out that the array
is uniformly excited (all elements have identical current amplitude and phase). The advantage of uniform amplitude excitation
is clear from the point of view of the feed network.
A. Modified IWO
As it was mentioned in Section II, in the IWO, each weed
(agent) may have different number of variables during the optimization process. By taking this feature of the algorithm, different number of variables for each agent can be considered
during the optimization. This modified IWO works similar to
the routine explained in Section II, some modifications, however, should be made in the algorithm process to take the number
of elements as an optimization parameter.
In this modified version of the IWO, each agent, corresponding to an array antenna, has different number of elements.
Thus, the fitness value of each agent is calculated based on the
number of elements and the position of each element in that
agent. Similar to the general IWO algorithm, each flowering
plant produces new seeds based on its ranking in the colony.
That is, the new arrays appear in the colony. However, the
reproduction process is modified to have different number of
elements for each produced array antenna. In the reproduction process, each element in the array is removed and then
reproduces some new elements in that array. The number of
new elements produced by each old element is defined to be
a constant value in each iteration. Then, these new elements
are being dispread over the aperture by normally distributed
random numbers with mean equal to the location of the producing element and varying standard deviations. The standard
deviation (SD) is defined similar to (1) where it starts from a
large value, called initial SD, and by increasing the number of
iterations; decreases gradually to a small value, called final SD.
Without any limitations on the reproduced elements, the
number of elements increases dramatically. Moreover, the
distance between elements should be controlled not to have
elements very close to each other. In order to overcome these
problems, each new produced element is allowed to be located
on the aperture if it is not closer than a predefined value (usually
half wavelength or the size of the antenna element of the array)
to any of the other elements already located on the aperture.

By choosing a relatively large value for the initial SD, the
new elements are dispread over the aperture and the possibility
of different number of elements over the aperture are tested.
Then, by decreasing the SD to a small value, the position of each
element on the aperture is optimized. Therefore, the number of
elements and the location of each element are optimized.
It should be noted that in this modified version of IWO the
whole process explained in Section II is carried out. Meanwhile,
the modified reproduction process is taken into account for each
agent.
B. Planar Thinned Array Examples
As the first design problem of thinned arrays, a rectangular
planar array with the aperture of
is considered. The
and
objective is to minimize the maximum SLL in the
planes. This problem is selected to compare the obtained result with the results in [19] and [28]. In [19] a 20 10
element planar array with a half a wavelength distance between
uniformly spaced elements was thinned using GA by turning off
some elements in that aperture. The optimal solution is a thinned
array with 108 turned on elements on the rectangular aperture
in
[19, Fig. 7]. The optimized SLLs are equal to
plane and
in
plane [19, Fig. 9]. The
fitness value of the optimal solution, defined as the sum of max. The same problem is
imum SLLs in both planes, is
considered in [28] by optimizing the inter-element spacing between 108 elements of the obtained thinned array in [19], using
a modified real GA to achieve lower SLLs. The optimal solution
, and SLLs
[28, Fig. 6] shows a lower fitness value,
and
in
and
,
equal to
respectively [28, Fig. 5].
In order to optimize this problem by using the IWO and based
on the described method, the number of elements and their positions are optimized to obtain the lowest SLLs at the desired
planes. The normalized array factor of a planar array with elements is given by

(3)
where
and
are the locations of elements in and
direction, respectively. This equation assumes that the array lies
in the - plane. Since the desired pattern is symmetric about
the -axis and -axis, a quarter of the aperture is considered to
reduce the number of optimization parameters to the quarter of
the array elements. The minimum distance between elements
is assumed to be half wavelength. It should be noted that the
amplitude coefficients, , are assumed to be 1.
Set up of the IWO algorithm for solving this problem is summarized in Table V. The final SD is chosen to be a small value
to optimize the location of each element with a high precision.
An averaging of five runs is considered and found to be sufficient. The best thinned array obtained is presented in Table VI.
Fig. 5(a) shows the radiation patterns of the obtained thinned
and
planes. The fitness value, the
array in both
and the
sum of maximum SLLs in both planes, is

KARIMKASHI AND KISHK: INVASIVE WEED OPTIMIZATION AND ITS FEATURES IN ELECTROMAGNETICS

1275

TABLE V
IWO PARAMETERS FOR THE THINNED ARRAY OPTIMIZATION PROBLEMS

TABLE VI
THE COORDINATES OF THE ARRAY ELEMENTS IN WAVELENGTH: i

(x ; y )

TABLE VII
THE COORDINATES OF THE ARRAY ELEMENTS IN WAVELENGTH: i

(x ; y )

=0

Fig. 5. Optimized thinned array antenna for reduction of SLL in the '
and '
planes, (a) radiation patterns in the '
and '
, (b) the
array configuration of the optimized thinned array, (c) 3D radiation pattern.

= 90

=0

= 90

obtained SLLs are
in
plane and
in
plane. The array configuration of the thinned array
for the upper right quarter of the aperture is depicted in Fig. 5(b)
(compare with [28, Fig. 6] and [19, Fig. 7]). 18 elements (72 elements for the whole aperture) are the optimized number of elements to achieve the lowest SLLs. Comparing these results with
those in [19] and [28] it can be concluded that by employing this

algorithm, much lower SLLs at both planes are achieved with
more than 25% saving on the number of elements.
Another optimization problem is the reduction of SLLs in all
planes. It can be seen from Fig. 5(b) that most of the elements
are around the and axes. Such an array configuration produces high SLLs at some other planes as shown in Fig. 5(c). In
order to reduce the SLLs in all the planes, we decided to define
,
the fitness function as the maximum SLL in
and
planes to have more elements at the central part
of the aperture. This fitness function helps to have less computation and avoid an expensive optimization process. The same
optimization parameters shown in Table V are chosen for this
problem. Table VII represents the obtained thinned array con,
figuration. The array radiation pattern cuts in
and
for the best optimal solution are shown in Fig. 6(a).
The array configuration, shown in Fig. 6(b), consists of 80 elements (for the whole aperture) distributed on the aperture. It
is observed that more elements are located at the central part
of the aperture as it was expected. Fig. 6(c) is the 3D radiation
pattern of this array. Though low SLLs are obtained at the three
cuts shown in Fig. 6(a), SLLs haven’t decreased effectively in
the other planes.
In order to have low SLLs in all planes, the fitness function
is defined as the maximum SLLs in all the planes. The same
optimization parameters are selected for this problem. The result
of optimization is a thinned planar array with 92 elements (for
the whole aperture) depicted in Table VIII. Fig. 7(a) shows the
array configuration on a quarter of the aperture. The radiation
pattern of this array is shown in Fig. 7(b) where the maximum
. comparing this results to that of [28], where
SLL is
GA is used to minimize the SLLs for 100 elements sparse array
[28, Figs. 7 and 8], one can see that the IWO results lower SLL
in [28]) with less number of elements.
(
VI. DUAL-BAND U-SLOT PATCH ANTENNA
To demonstrate the applicability of the IWO in electromagnetics, the design of a U-slot patch antenna [31], [32] to have
the desired dual-band characteristics is considered. This concept

1276

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

Fig. 7. Optimized thinned array antenna for reduction of SLL in all ' planes,
(a) The array configuration of the optimized thinned array, (b) 3D radiation pattern.
TABLE VIII
THE COORDINATES OF THE ARRAY ELEMENTS IN WAVELENGTH: i

=0
= 45

Fig. 6. Optimized thinned array antenna for reduction of SLL in the '
,
'
and '
planes, (a) radiation patterns in the '
,'
and '
, (b) the array configuration of the optimized thinned array, (c) 3D
radiation pattern.

= 45
= 90

= 90

=0

was introduced in [33], [34] where a U-slot in the patch fed by
an L-probe produces notches within the matching band. Fig. 8
shows the configuration of the antenna structure. The L-probe
feeding technique is used to have a wideband patch antenna
[35], [36] and then the U-slot is cut on the patch to introduce
notches, resulting in dual-band operation. The length (L) and the
and height of
width (W) of the patch and also the position
are predefined. Then, the optimization of seven
L-probe
, , , ,
and
are required.
other parameters, ,

(x ; y )

Since these parameters are not independent, their ranges should
be chosen carefully.
The purpose of the optimization is to achieve the desired reflection coefficient within the matching band, 2–4 GHz. The
IWO is linked to a MoM program that simulates the antenna
reflection coefficient at 20 points within the frequency range.
The fitness function is defined as the summation of differences
between the relative values of the desired and obtained reflection coefficient at all 20 frequencies. The objective is to have
reflection coefficient at 2.4 GHz and 3.3 GHz frequencies and zero at the other frequencies. The reason for choosing
as the desired reflection coefficient is that decreasing
this value results in a very low value in one frequency but relatively high at the other one.
The restricted boundary condition is applied to this optimization problem. The maximum number of plant population is selected to be 10 and the number of seeds is varied linearly from

KARIMKASHI AND KISHK: INVASIVE WEED OPTIMIZATION AND ITS FEATURES IN ELECTROMAGNETICS

1277

Fig. 8. The configuration of the U-slot patch antenna fed by an L-probe with
top view (top) and side view (lower).

TABLE IX
FINAL DIMENSIONS OF THE OBTAINED U-SLOT PATCH ANTENNA IN MM

Fig. 9. U-slot patch antenna fed by an L-probe (a) the obtained reflection coefficient, and (b) the convergence curve.

4 to zero. The nonlinear modulation index is set to 3 over 100
iterations.
The optimized parameters of the U-slot patch antenna are
shown in Table IX. After simulating the antenna with more
number of frequencies within the frequency range, the reflection
coefficient shown in Fig. 9(a) is achieved. Fig. 9(b) illustrates
the convergence curve of IWO algorithm which is the normalized curve of the fitness function in dB. It can be seen that the
desired reflection coefficient within the frequency range of the
U-slot antenna is achieved.
VII. CONCLUSION
A numerical stochastic optimization algorithm based on the
weed ecology was introduced for electromagnetic applications.
The IWO algorithm is capturing the properties of the invasive
weeds, which led to a powerful optimization algorithm. By applying the IWO to the array antenna synthesis problems, the
performance of this algorithm was investigated. It was shown
that in certain instances the IWO outperforms the PSO in the
convergence rate as well as the final error level. Moreover, the
performance of the IWO for different boundary conditions and
tuning parameters was evaluated. From the simulation results,
it was observed that this algorithm is very stable and efficient
against different parameter values. The IWO was also utilized
to design aperiodic planar thinned array antennas by optimizing
the number of elements and at the same time their positions.
It was shown that by using this technique, thinned arrays with
less number of elements and lower sidelobes levels, compared to

the results already achieved from other methods were obtained.
Also, the IWO was applied to the design of a U-slot patch antenna fed by an L-probe to have a dual band performance with
the desired reflection coefficient.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank the reviewer for his valuable suggestions.
REFERENCES
[1] J. H. Holland, “Genetic algorithm,” Scie. Amer., pp. 62–72, Jul. 1992.
[2] J. Kennedy and R. C. Eberhart, “Particle swarm optimization,” presented at the IEEE Conf. Neural Networks IV, Piscataway, NJ, 1995.
[3] R. L. Haupt, “An introduction to genetic algorithms for electromagnetics,” IEEE Antennas Propag. Mag., vol. 37, pp. 7–15, Apr. 1995.
[4] D. S. Weile and E. Michielssen, “Genetic algorithm optimization applied to electromagnetics: A review,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag.,
vol. 45, pp. 343–353, Mar. 1997.
[5] D. W. Boeringer and D. H. Werner, “Particle swarm optimization
versus genetic algorithms for phased array synthesis,” IEEE Trans.
Antennas Propag., vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 397–407, Mar. 2004.
[6] J. Robinson and Y. Rahmat-Samii, “Particle swarm optimization in
electromagnetics,” IEEE Trans Antennas Propag., vol. 52, no. 2, pp.
397–407, Feb. 2004.
[7] M. Dorigo, V. Maniezzo, and A. Colorni, “Ant system: Optimization
by a colony of cooperating agents,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern.
B, Cybern., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 29–41, Feb. 1996.
[8] R. H. J. M. Otten and L. P. P. P. van Ginnekent, The Annealing Algorithm. Boston/Dordrecht/London: Kluwer Academic, 1989.
[9] S. Mikki and A. A. Kishk, “Quantum particle swarm optimization
for electromagnetics,” IEEE Trans, Antennas Propag., vol. 54, pp.
2764–2775, Oct. 2006.

1278

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

[10] Y. L. Abdel-Majid and M. M. Dawoud, “Accurate null steering in linear
arrays using tabu search,” in Proc. 10th international Conf. Antennas
Propag., Apr. 1997, vol. 1, pp. 365–369.
[11] W. G. Weng, F. Yang, and A. Elsherbeni, “Linear antenna array
synthesis using Taguchi’s method: A novel optimization technique in
electromagnetics,” IEEE Trans Antennas Propag., vol. 55, no. 3, pp.
723–730, Mar. 2007.
[12] E. Rajo-lglesias and O. Quevedo-Teruel, “Linear array synthesis using
an ant-colony-optimization-based algorithm,” IEEE Antennas Propag.
Mag., vol. 49, no. , pp. 70–79, Apr. 2007.
[13] C. M. Coleman, E. J. Rothwell, and J. E. Ross, “Investigation of simulated annealing, ant-colony optimization, and genetic algorithms for
self-structuring antennas,” IEEE Trans Antennas Propag., vol. 52, no.
4, pp. 1007–1014, Apr. 2004.
[14] A. R. Mehrabian and C. Lucas, “A novel numerical optimization algorithm inspired from weed colonization,” Ecol. Inform., vol. 1, no. 4, pp.
355–366, Dec. 2006.
[15] S. Mikki and A. A. Kishk, “Improved particle swarm optimization technique using hard boundary conditions,” Microw. Opt. Tech. Lett., vol.
46, no. 5, pp. 422–426, Sep. 2005.
[16] S. Xu and Y. Rahmat-Samii, “Boundary conditions in particle swarm
optimization revisited,” IEEE Trans Antennas Propag., vol. 52, no. 3,
pp. 760–765, Mar. 2007.
[17] S. Mikki and A. A. Kishk, “Hybrid periodic boundary condition for
particle swarm optimization,” IEEE Trans Antennas Propag., vol. 55,
no. 11, pp. 3251–3256, Nov. 2007.
[18] , Y. Ramat-Samii and E. Michielssen, Eds., Electromagnetic Optimization by Genetic Algorithms. New York: Wiley, 1999.
[19] R. L. Haupt, “Thinned arrays using genetic algorithms,” IEEE Trans.
Antennas Propag., vol. 42, no. 7, Jul. 1994.
[20] R. L. Haupt, “Optimized element spacing for low sidelobe concentric
ring arrays,” IEEE Trans Antennas Propag., vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 266–268,
Jan. 2008.
[21] N. Jin and Y. Rahmat-Samii, “Advances in particle swarm optimization
for antenna designs: Real-number, binary, single-objective and multiobjective implementations,” IEEE Trans Antennas Propag., vol. 55, no.
3, pp. 556–567, Mar. 2007.
[22] K. V. Deligkaris, Z. D. Zaharis, D. G. Kampitaki, S. K. Goudos, I.
T. Rekanos, and M. N. Spasos, “Thinned planar array design using
boolean PSO with velocity mutation,” IEEE Trans Magn., vol. 45, no.
3, pp. 1490–1493, Mar. 2009.
[23] C. A. Meijer, “Simulated annealing in the design of thinned arrays
having low sidelobe levels,” in Proc. South African Symp. Communications and Signal Processing, 1998, pp. 361–366.
[24] D. J. O’Neill, “Element placement in thinned arrays using genetic algorithms,” in Proc. Oceans Engineering for Today’s Technology and
Tomorrows Preservation, 1994, vol. 2, pp. 301–306.
[25] O. Quevedo-Teruel and E. Rajo-Iglesias, “Ant colony optimization in
thinned array synthesis with minimum sidelobe level,” IEEE Antennas
Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 5, pp. 349–352, 2006.
[26] S. Mosca and M. Ciattaglia, “Ant colony optimization to design thinned
arrays,” in Proc. IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society Int. Symp.,
2006, vol. 1, pp. 4675–4678.
[27] M. G. Bray, D. H. Werner, D. W. Boeringer, and D. W. Machuga, “Optimization of thinned aperiodic phase array using genetic algorithm to
reduce grating lobes during scanning,” IEEE Trans Antennas Propag.,
vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 1732–1742, Dec. 2002.
[28] K. Cheng, X. Yun, and C. Han, “Synthesis of sparse planar array using
modified real genetic algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol.
55, no. 4, Apr. 2007.
[29] T. G. Spence and D. H. Werner, “Thinning of aperiodic antenna arrays
for low side-lobe levels and broadband operation using genetic algorithms,” in Proc. IEEE Antennas and propagation Society Int. Symp.,
2006, pp. 2059–2062.
[30] M. M. Khodier and C. G. Christodoulou, “Linear array geometry
synthesis with minimum sidelobe level and null control using particle
swarm optimization,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 53, no. 8,
Apr. 2005.
[31] T. Huynh and K. F. Lee, “Single-layer single-patch wideband microstrip antenna,” Electron. Lett., vol. 31, no. 16, pp. 1310–1312,
1995.
[32] K. F. Tong, K. M. Luk, K. F. Lee, and R. Q. Lee, “A broadband U-slot
rectangular patch antenna on a microwave substrate,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 954–960, 2000.
[33] K. F. Lee, S. L. Yang, and A. A. Kishk, “Dual- and multiband U-slot
patch antennas,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 7,
pp. 645–647, 2008.

[34] K. F. Lee, S. L. Yang, and A. A. Kishk, “The versatile U-slot patch
antenna,” in Proc. 3rd Eur. Conf. on Antennas and Propagation, Mar.
23–27, 2009, pp. 3312–3314.
[35] C. L. Mak, K. M. Luk, K. F. Lee, and Y. L. Chow, “Experimental study
of a microstrip patch antenna with an L-shaped probe,” IEEE Trans.
Antennas Propag., vol. 48, no. 5, pp. 777–783, May 2000.
[36] Y. X. Guo, C. L. Mak, K. M. Luk, and K. F. Lee, “Analysis and design of L-probe proximity fed-patch antennas,” IEEE Trans. Antennas
Propag., vol. 49, pp. 145–149, Feb. 2001.

Shaya Karimkashi was born in Tehran, Iran. in
1980. He received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from K. N. Toosi University of technology,
Tehran, and the M.S. degree in electrical engineering
from University of Tehran, in 2003 and 2006,
respectively. Currently he is working toward Ph.D.
degree at the University of Mississippi, University.
His research interests include array antennas,
focused antennas, reflector antennas, optimization
methods in EM and microwave measurement techniques.

Ahmed A. Kishk received the B.S. degree in
electronic and communication engineering from
Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt, in 1977, and the
B.S. degree in applied mathematics from Ain-Shams
University, Cairo, Egypt, in 1980, and the M.Eng
and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, Canada, in 1983 and 1986, respectively.
From 1977 to 1981, he was a Research Assistant
and an Instructor at the Faculty of Engineering,
Cairo University. From 1981 to 1985, he was a
Research Assistant in the Department of Electrical
Engineering, University of Manitoba, where, rom December 1985 to August
1986, he was a Research Associate Fellow. In 1986, he joined the Department
of Electrical Engineering, University of Mississippi, as an Assistant Professor.
He was on sabbatical leave at Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden
during the 1994–1995 academic years. He is now a Professor at the University
of Mississippi (since 1995). His research interest includes the areas of design
of millimeter frequency antennas, feeds for parabolic reflectors, dielectric
resonator antennas, microstrip antennas, EBG, artificial magnetic conductors,
soft and hard surfaces, phased array antennas, and computer aided design for
antennas. He has published over 200 refereed journal articles and 27 book
chapters. He is a coauthor of the book Microwave Horns and Feeds (London,
U.K., 1994; New York: 1994) and a coauthor of chapter 2 in Handbook of
Microstrip Antennas (London, U.K., 1989).
Dr. Kishk received the 1995 and 2006 outstanding paper awards for papers
published in the Applied Computational Electromagnetic Society Journal. He
received the 1997 Outstanding Engineering Educator Award from Memphis section of the IEEE. He received the Outstanding Engineering Faculty Member of
the Year in 1998 and 2009, Faculty Research Award for outstanding performance in research on 2001 and 2005. He received the Award of Distinguished
Technical Communication for his paper published in the IEEE Antennas and
Propagation Magazine, 2001. He also received The Valued Contribution Award
for outstanding Invited Presentation, “EM Modeling of Surfaces with STOP or
GO Characteristics—Artificial Magnetic Conductors and Soft and Hard Surfaces” from the Applied Computational Electromagnetic Society. He received
the Microwave Theory and Techniques Society Microwave Prize 2004. He is
a Fellow member of IEEE since 1998 (Antennas and Propagation Society and
Microwave Theory and Techniques), a member of Sigma Xi society, a member
of the U.S. National Committee of International Union of Radio Science (URSI)
Commission B, a member of the Applied Computational Electromagnetics Society, a Fellow member of the Electromagnetic Academy, and a member of Phi
Kappa Phi Society. He was an Associate Editor of the IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine from 1990 to 1993 and is now an Editor. He was a Co-editor
of the Special Issue on Advances in the Application of the Method of Moments
to Electromagnetic Scattering Problems in the ACES Journal, was an Editor the
during 1997, and was Editor-in-Chief from 1998 to 2001. He was the Chair
of Physics and Engineering Division of the Mississippi Academy of Science
(2001–2002). He was a Guest Editor of the Special Issue on Artificial Magnetic Conductors, Soft/Hard Surfaces, and Other Complex Surfaces of the IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, January 2005.

