IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 5, MAY 2010

1739

Optimal Frequency for Wireless Power Transmission
Into Dispersive Tissue
Ada S. Y. Poon, Member, IEEE, Stephen O’Driscoll, Member, IEEE, and Teresa H. Meng, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—RF wireless interface enables remotely-powered implantable devices. Current studies in wireless power transmission
into biological tissue tend to operate below 10 MHz due to tissue
absorption loss, which results in large receive antennas. This
paper examines the range of frequencies that will optimize the
tradeoff between received power and tissue absorption. It first
models biological tissue as a dispersive dielectric in a homogeneous medium and performs full-wave analysis to show that the
optimal frequency is above 1 GHz for small receive coil and typical
transmit-receive separations. Then, it includes the air-tissue interface and models human body as a planarly layered medium. The
optimal frequency is shown to remain in the GHz-range. Finally,
electromagnetic simulations are performed to include the effect of
load impedance and look at the matched power gain. The optimal
frequency is in the GHz-range for mm-sized transmit antenna and
shifts to the sub-GHz range for cm-sized transmit antenna. The
multiple orders of magnitude increase in the operating frequency
enables dramatic miniaturization of implantable devices.
Index Terms—Implantable medical devices, wireless power
transfer.

I. INTRODUCTION
MPLANTABLE medical devices will play an important
role in modern medicine for preventive and post-surgery
monitoring, drug delivery, local stimulation, and biomimetic
prosthesis. To reduce the risk of wire snapping, and replacement and corrosion of embedded batteries, wireless delivery
of energy to these devices is desirable. Low-frequency electromagnetic field as the carrier in conjunction with inductive
coupling as the transmission mechanism is a commonly used
approach. In the past fifty years, analyses [1]–[5], circuit design
techniques [4], [6]–[11], link optimization [12], and prototype
implementations [13]–[16] tended to operate at frequencies
below 10 MHz. On the other hand, the telemetry systems, either
battery powered or wirelessly powered by a low-frequency
carrier, operate between 10 MHz to a few GHz [17]–[20].
In a related field to wireless power delivery, thermotherapy

I

Manuscript received March 08, 2008; revised September 07, 2009, accepted
November 29, 2009. Date of publication March 01, 2010; date of current version
May 05, 2010. This paper was presented in part at the Annual International
Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, Lyon,
France, Aug. 23–26, 2007 and also at the IEEE International Solid-State Circuits
Conference, San Francisco, CA, Sep. 2–6, 2009.
A. S. Y. Poon and T. H. Meng are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, CA 94305 USA (e-mail: adapoon@stanford.edu;
thm@stanford.edu).
S. O’Driscoll is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of California, Davis, CA 95616 USA (e-mail: odriscoll@ucdavis.
edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TAP.2010.2044310

where electromagnetic field is used to heat up a targeted area
inside the body such as hyperthermia, uses both low-frequency
MHz) and high-frequency (
GHz) carriers ([21], Ch.
(
4). Work has been done on identifying the frequency that
optimizes the tradeoff between penetration and resolution [22].
A fundamental question therefore arises: is there an optimal
frequency for the wireless delivery of power into biological
tissue that maximizes the ratio of received power to total tissue
absorption? In this paper, we consider the scenario where the
receiver dimension is much smaller than its depth inside the
body, and show that there exists an optimal frequency and this
frequency is in the sub-GHz to the low GHz-range.
Let us first review the reasoning behind the popular use of
low-frequency carrier in wireless power transmission. As tissue
absorption increases with frequency, most analyses assume that
lower frequency would yield better transfer efficiency. They
therefore omit the displacement current. The propagation of
electromagnetic field is then governed by a diffusion equation
which is a quasi-static approximation to Maxwell’s equations.
Solving the diffusion equation reveals that electromagnetic
fields decay exponentially inside tissue and the length of diffusion is inversely proportional to the square root of frequency.
That is, higher frequency decays faster which agrees with the
initial assumption and reinforces the use of low-frequency carrier. However, the diffusion equation is a valid approximation
for good conductors, and tissue is better modeled as a low loss
dielectric in which displacement current is significant. Solving
the Helmholtz equation reveals that the penetration depth is
asymptotically independent of frequency at high frequency.
As received power is proportional to the rate of change of the
incident magnetic field, higher carrier frequency is seemingly
better. However, dielectric dispersion in tissue begins to play a
role in the GHz-range. Therefore, we conjecture the existence
of an optimal frequency.
To find the optimal frequency, we will first model biological
tissue as a dispersive dielectric in a homogeneous medium, and
approximate the transmitted field by the field emanated from
the set of lowest order magnetic multipoles. Here, we define the
power transfer efficiency as the ratio of received power to total
tissue absorption. For a small receive coil, the frequency that
optimizes this efficiency, is shown to be
(1)
where
characterizes the dielectric properties of
tissue in the Debye relaxation model and is the transmit-receive separation. Based on the measured data in [23], the
optimal frequencies for 17 different kinds of biological tissue

0018-926X/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE

1740

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 5, MAY 2010

are above 1 GHz even for a separation of 10 cm. The transfer
efficiency at the optimal frequency is approximately propor. This implies that the regime for optimal
tional to
power transmission is in between the far field and the near field.
Next, we include the air-tissue interface and model human
body as a planarly layered medium, and replace the source
model by a finite dimensional current loop. We compute the
Sommerfeld integrals and show that the optimal frequency
remains in the GHz-range for typical tissue composition
and transmit-receive separation. We also perform the SAR
(specific absorption rate) calculation and compute the maximum induced voltage at the receiver. Depending on the load
impedance, sub-mW to mW of power can be safely delivered
to a mm-sized receive coil from a cm-sized transmit coil with a
separation of a few cm at carrier frequency of 1 GHz.
Lastly, as received power depends on the load impedance,
we will study its effect on the optimal frequency. The choice of
load impedance depends on receiver design. In the inductively
coupled link, resonant tuning is a commonly used technique
[1]–[16]. The load impedance is chosen to achieve a given
output voltage. The tuning configuration—series versus shunt
tuning—is chosen to maximize the overall power gain. Shunt
tuning at receiver and series tuning at transmitter is the most
commonly used configuration. As our objective is to achieve
maximum power transfer efficiency, a different approach is
to model the power link as a two-port network and perform
simultaneously conjugate matching at the transmitter and the
receiver. The output voltage requirement is then fulfilled by
the choice of various matching networks. We will include
the matching network and perform electromagnetic simulation using Zeland IE3D [24]. The optimal frequency is in
the GHz-range for mm-sized transmit coil and shifts to the
sub-GHz range for cm-sized transmit coil.
We progressively include the effect of tissue dielectric properties, air-tissue multi-layered structure, and load impedance at
the receiver, and study their effect on the optimal frequency
for power transmission. All the results suggest that the optimal
frequency is about 2 order of magnitude higher than the commonly used range of frequencies. For a fixed power transfer efficiency, the dimension of the receiver can be reduced by 100
times. This allows dramatic miniaturization of implantable devices. Furthermore, higher carrier frequency has better tolerance
to receiver displacement and orientation. If data is modulated
on top of the power carrier, wider signal bandwidth and hence
higher data rate can be supported.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
presents the model and problem formulation. Sections III, IV,
and V investigate the effect of dielectric dispersion in tissue,
layered structure of body, and load impedance at receiver on
the optimal frequency respectively. Finally, we conclude this
paper in Section VI.
In the following, we use boldface letters for vectors and
boldface capital letters with a bar such as
for matrices.
denotes its magnitude and is a unit vector
For a vector
and
denotes the conjugate and
denoting its direction.
the conjugate transpose operations respectively. For a complex
and
denote the real and the imaginary
number
parts respectively.

Fig. 1. A source region on top of an arbitrary oriented receive dipole.

II. MODEL AND PROBLEM FORMULATION
Referring to Fig. 1, we consider a source region of magnetic
current density delivering power to an arbitrarily oriented magnetic dipole. First, we consider a source region despite the fact
that most study in the literature models the penetration of electromagnetic field into tissue as a plane wave normally incident
on the air-tissue interface. It is because the source region is close
to the tissue and the separation is usually much less than a wavelength. Thus, the plane-wave model is not appropriate. Second,
only solenoidal current sources are used because their electric
near field is smaller. Therefore, tissue absorption is less. Similar
argument is made in [25]. Third, we consider area-constrained
implantable devices and therefore we model the receive antenna
as a magnetic dipole.
Assuming all sources and fields have a time dependence
, the electromagnetic fields due to the transmit magnetic
current density
and the induced receive current density
satisfy
(2a)
(2b)
Substituting them into the Poynting theorem yields
(3)
Rearranging terms, the transmitted power density is related to
the received power density and losses by
(4)
The term on the left is the complex transmitted power density.
is the radiation loss; the imaginary part
On the right,
is the sum of dielectric loss and induced-current loss;
of
is the complex received power density. Suppose
and
is the distance between the center of the source region and the
tissue interface. Then, the tissue region is defined by
and the amount of energy absorbed by the tissue is
(5)
Suppose the receive dipole is at
and is pointing in the direction . The power transferred to the receive dipole is given by
(6)

POON et al.: OPTIMAL FREQUENCY FOR WIRELESS POWER TRANSMISSION INTO DISPERSIVE TISSUE

1741

is the spherical Hankel funcwhere
is the spherical Bessel function,
tion of the first kind,
and
is the spherical harmonic function of degree
and order using the Schmidt seminormalized definition. The
Green functions can then be written as
Fig. 2. A receive current loop connected to a load Z .

(11a)

where is the induced current on the receive dipole and is the
area of the dipole. As we are concerned with the amount of heat
absorbed by the tissue, we define the power transfer efficiency as
the ratio of real received power to total tissue absorption:
(7)
The scattered field due to the induced current density
is much weaker than the incident field due to
. Therefore,
the electromagnetic fields can be approximated by ignoring the
scattered field. Then, the fields can be expressed in integral
forms as
(8a)
(8b)
and
are the magnetic and the elecwhere
tric dyadic Green functions respectively. Different transmission
media will have different sets of Green functions. In the next
two sections, we will study the variation of with frequency in
homogeneous and planarly layered media.
Finally, the total magnetic flux incident on the receive dipole
. The rate of change of this total flux yields
is
the induced emf. With reference to Fig. 2, this induced emf is
and hence, the inthe voltage across the load impedance
duced current equals to
. The received
power can be written as
(9)
In the next two sections, we will assume a fixed load impedance
while in Section V, we will study the variation of with frequency for matched load.

(11b)
Electromagnetic fields at a distance depend on the source
from its projection onto
’s. For a small source
region, the projection onto the lowest order multipoles
suffice to model the source region. The corresponding electromagnetic fields are given by
(12a)
(12b)
The direction of
gives the orientation of the transmit dipole and its magnitude
yields the transmit magnetic moment.
With this simplification, the integral in the tissue absorption
in (5) can be expressed as

(13)

(14)
in which the cross terms are zero due to the symmetry of
in over the domain of integration. Defining as a
vector with elements
and as a
diagonal matrix with diagonal elements
, we have the following compact representation for the tissue absorption
(15)

III. OPTIMAL FREQUENCY IN HOMOGENEOUS DISPERSIVE
TISSUE
This section investigates the effect of dielectric dispersion in
tissue. Therefore, we assume the medium is homogeneous with
and the tissue dispersion is captured by the frequency variation of the relative permittivity . We decompose
the dyadic Green functions into a sum of vector multipoles. In a
, these
homogeneous medium and spherical coordinates
multipoles are given by [26, Ch. 7]
(10a)

When the domain of integration is not a half space,
can be
non-diagonal but the matrix representation remains hold. Similarly, we define
(16)
the received power in matrix form is
(17)

(10b)

Putting together, the power transfer efficiency can be expressed
as

(10c)

(18)

1742

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 5, MAY 2010

with frequency in the GHz-range. From Kramers-Kronig relations [27, Sec. 7.10], the dielectric loss should become significant over the GHz-range. Therefore, we conjecture the existence
of an optimal frequency in the GHz-range. Next, we will use the
Debye relaxation model to prove our conjecture.
B. Derivation of Optimal Frequency
The orientation of the transmit dipole that maximizes the efficiency in (18) is given by
(21)
and the optimal efficiency is
(22)
Defining
Fig. 3. Plot the real part of the relative permittivity and conductivity of muscle
based on the Debye and the 4-term Cole-Cole relaxation models.

Now, the efficiency depends on the orientation of the transmit
dipole captured by , the orientation of the receive dipole captured by , and the dielectric properties of the medium captured by . In the following, we will derive the power transfer
efficiency that maximizes over all possible orientations of the
transmit dipole, and then find the frequency that maximizes this
optimal power transfer efficiency for a given receive orientation.
Before proceeding to the derivation, we will review the characterization of biological tissue first.

which are the projections of
the three lowest order multipoles at
can be written as

for
onto the directions of
, the optimal efficiency

(23)
The optimal efficiency is independent of the transmit magnetic
moment. From definitions in (10), we obtain

A. Review on Tissue Characterization
At low frequency, the frequency variation of
by the induced current, that is,

is dominated
(19)
(24a)

where
and are the static relative permittivity and conductivity respectively. As the operating frequency increases, other
loss mechanisms emerge. The dominant one is the dielectric relaxation loss. Debye relaxation model and its variants are popular models for biological media. In this relaxation model, the
relative permittivity is expressed as [21]:
(20)
The relaxation phenomenon is model by a first-order equation.
Each type of tissue is characterized by 3 parameters:
,
and . The is the relaxation time constant, and its inverse gives
the range of frequency where this model is valid. The
is the
relative permittivity at frequencies where
. As we are
interested in the efficiency of the power link above 10 MHz, we
will use the Debye relaxation model for the frequency range between 10 MHz and 100 GHz in our study. Using muscle as an
example, Fig. 3 plots the real part of the relative permittivity
and the equivalent conductivity calculated from the imaginary
part using parameters from [23].1 The real part begins to vary

(24b)

(25a)

(25b)

1The parameters in [23] are for the 4-term Cole-Cole model which is a variant

of the Debye relaxation model. Conversion to the Debye relaxation model is as
follows: 
 ;

 , and 
  = 
 .

=

=1 +

=

( 1 ) ( )+

where

and

is the exponential integral function.

POON et al.: OPTIMAL FREQUENCY FOR WIRELESS POWER TRANSMISSION INTO DISPERSIVE TISSUE

The relaxation model is valid over the frequency range where
. Over this range, the relative permittivity in (20) is
approximately equal to

1743

TABLE I
APPROXIMATE OPTIMAL FREQUENCY FOR 17 DIFFERENT TYPES OF
cm
BIOLOGICAL TISSUE, ASSUMING d

=1

(26)
where

. This yields
(27)

At high frequency where
lowing approximations:

, we have the fol-

(28a)
(28b)
Assuming

is much smaller than the skin depth, that is,

At the optimal frequency, the approximated efficiency in (31)
is lower-bounded by

(29)
Putting the above equations together yields

(30a)

(34)

(30b)
, the optimal effiDefining
ciency in (23) can then be approximated by

(31)
It is maximized as in (32), shown at the bottom of the page.
Gabriel et al. have experimentally characterized the dielectric
properties of 17 kinds of biological tissue [23]. In general,
. Therefore, we have
(33)
The optimal frequency is approximately inversely proportional
to the square root of transmit-receive separation.

It is approximately inversely proportional to the cube of the
transmit-receive separation. In the far field, the power gain follows the inverse square law; that is, it is inversely proportional
to the square of the transmit-receive separation. In the near field,
the power gain is inversely proportional to the 6th power of
the transmit-receive separation. Now, the optimal efficiency is
somewhere in between the far field and the near field.
C. Numerical Examples
Based on the measured data in [23], Table I lists the approximated optimal frequencies for 17 different kinds of tissue assuming
cm. All approximated optimal frequencies are in
cm.
the GHz-range. They are above 1 GHz even for
As muscle is the most widely reported tissue, let us take
muscle as an example. We consider a receive dipole tilted 45
with respect to the -axis; that is,
.
The area of the receive dipole is (2 mm) . We first compute
the efficiency given in (23) that optimizes the orientation of the
’s, over the frequency range betransmit dipole for the given
tween 1 MHz and 10 GHz. Then, we find the efficiency that

(32)

1744

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 5, MAY 2010

Fig. 5. A planarly layered medium.

tive permittivity captures the effect of displacement current and
induced-current loss. When the frequency is low enough, the
imaginary component dominates, that is, the induce current is
substantial whereas the displacement current is negligible. The
wavenumber can be approximated by
(35)
The skin depth
nary part of

is given by the inverse of the imagi-

(36)

Fig. 4. Dipole source in homogeneous medium—(a) optimal frequency with
d
mm and receive dipole tilted 45 ; and (b) optimal efficiency with A
(2 mm) and Z
.

=2

= 1


=

is maximized across this frequency range for different implant
, and compare them with the approximations in
depth,
(33). Fig. 4(a) shows these curves. The approximated and the
exact optimal frequencies based on the Debye relaxation model
are very close. Hence, the formula in (33) is a good approximation. We also plot the efficiency at the optimal frequency and
compare it with the approximation in (34). The two curves are
shown in Fig. 4(b). The approximation shows good matches as
well.
As a number of commercial electromagnetic field solvers that
include human body model use the 4-term Cole-Cole model
which is a variant of the Debye relaxation model. We also
compute the exact optimal frequencies based on the Cole-Cole
model. For reference, Fig. 3 compares the dielectric properties
of muscle between the two relaxation models. Fig. 4 shows that
the two models yield similar results.
D. Variation of Penetration Depth With Frequency
Now, we attempt to understand the reason behind the popular use of low-frequency carrier in wireless power transmission for implantable systems. In (19), the low-frequency rela-

It is inversely proportional to the square root of frequency. According to this low-frequency model, the efficiency decreases
. It is worse to operate at higher frequenexponentially with
cies than at DC. However, this low-frequency model cannot be
used to conclude the behavior at higher frequencies. At high frequency, the imaginary part should be approximated by the exis approximated by
pression in (27). The skin depth
(37)
Depending on , the skin depth is invariant with frequency when
, and it is inversely proportional to the square of
. This transition introduces the
frequency when
optimal frequency in the GHz-range.
IV. OPTIMAL FREQUENCY IN PLANARLY LAYERED
BODY MODEL
The analyses in homogeneous medium reveal that the effect
of tissue absorption on the power transfer efficiency is not as
worse as we used to believe. Higher efficiency can be achieved
by operating at higher frequency until reaching the optimal frequency. In this section, we include the air-tissue interface and
study its effect on the optimal frequency. We model human body
as a planarly layered medium, as illustrated in Fig. 5. The analysis can be extended to other inhomogeneous media such as
spherically layered medium and cylindrically layered medium
which may provide a better model for certain part of the body.
A. Dipole Source
For small source region, the lowest order multipole
fields in (12) correspond to fields emanated from the

POON et al.: OPTIMAL FREQUENCY FOR WIRELESS POWER TRANSMISSION INTO DISPERSIVE TISSUE

three

orthogonal

magnetic

dipoles.

1745

More

specifically,
,
give the magnetic fields due to magnetic dipole
and
pointing in the
, and directions respectively. In a homogeneous medium, they can be obtained from each other
by rotation transformations. In a layered medium, we need to
distinguish between horizontal magnetic dipole (HMD) and
vertical magnetic dipole (VMD). The electromagnetic fields
due to dipoles pointing in the and directions can be obtained
from the HMD while those due to a dipole pointing in the
direction can be obtained from the VMD.
For convenience, we use the same symbols as in the homogeneous medium. We denote the magnetic fields due to the three
, and
, and their
lowest order multipoles by
, and
. The elecelectric field counterparts by
tromagnetic fields are then given by
(38a)
(38b)
Now, the direction of
gives the orientation of
the transmit dipole and its magnitude gives the transmit magnetic moment. As most advanced electromagnetic textbooks
’s
do not include the complete set of expressions for
and
’s, we summarize it in Appendix A. With similar
definitions as in (16), we obtain the matrix form for the power
is also a
transfer efficiency same as in (18). By symmetry,
diagonal matrix. Therefore, the optimal efficiency is similar to
(23) and is given by

Fig. 6. Dipole source in planarly layered medium—(a) optimal frequency with
(d ; d ; d ) = (1 cm, 1.2 cm, 1.7 cm) and receive dipole tilted 45 ; and (b)
optimal efficiency with A = (2 mm) and Z = 1 
.

(39)
For given and
’s, the frequency that maximizes this efficiency gives the optimal frequency. Unlike in the homogeneous
medium, closed-form expressions for the terms inside the summation are not feasible. Therefore, we cannot obtain a closed
form expression for the optimal frequency.
We numerically compute the optimal frequency for two cases.
In the first case, it is a halfspace with air in medium 1 and muscle
in medium 2. In the second case, we consider an air-skin-fatmuscle multi-layered medium. In both cases, we use the measured data in [23] to model the dielectric dispersion of biological
tissues. To accelerate the computation of the Sommerfeld inte’s and
’s, we
grals involved in the expressions for
follow [28] to deform the integration path. Furthermore, as the
integrals involve Bessel functions which are oscillatory, we partition the revised integration path into sub-paths with exponentially increasing length, and perform the integration over these
sub-paths.
Fig. 6(a) plots the optimal frequency versus the implant depth,
. The transmit dipole is 1 cm above the tissue interface and
the receive dipole is tilted 45 with respect to the axis. In the
air-skin-fat-muscle multi-layered medium, the thickness of skin
is 2 mm and the thickness of fat is 5 mm. We also include the
curve from the last section for homogeneous medium (denote
by “muscle” in the figure) where the transmit dipole is 2 mm

above the interface. All optimal frequencies are above 1 GHz.
They vary with different thickness of tissues. In typical tissue
compositions, they are in the GHz-range. Fig. 6(b) plots the efficiency at the optimal frequency versus the implant depth. The
efficiency is not very sensitive to the variation of tissue composition. Its variation with the implant depth remains approximately
inversely proportional to .
B. Uniform Source Region
The analysis based on dipole source is carried over from homogeneous medium to layered medium. Now we consider a finite dimensional source region. Assume that we could implement a sheet of fully controlled source elements in the region.
If all source elements have identical current and point in the
direction, the source current density becomes
(40)
with uniThis is equivalent to a square current loop of area
form current . The electromagnetic fields can be obtained from
those due to VMD and are given by
(41a)
(41b)

1746

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 5, MAY 2010

Fig. 8. Local SAR distribution at 1 GHz for (d
cm) and A = (2 cm) .

Fig. 7. Uniform source in planarly layered medium—(a) optimal frequency
with (d ; d ; d ) = (1 cm, 1.2 cm, 1.7 cm), receive dipole tilted 45 , and
A = (2 cm) ; and (b) optimal efficiency with A = (2 mm) and Z
= 1
.

The frequency that maximizes the efficiency defined in (7), is the
optimal frequency. When dipole sources are used, the efficiency
does not depend on the area of the transmit dipole. Here, the
efficiency will depend on the area of the transmit source.
Fig. 7(a) plots the optimal frequency versus the implant depth
(2 cm) . All optimal frequencies are above 1 GHz.
for
Fig. 7(b) plots the efficiency at the optimal frequency versus
the implant depth (the solid line). The efficiency is about 5
dB worse than that obtained from the dipole-source analysis.
This is because the orientation of the transmit dipole is optimized for the given orientation of the receive dipole. As all the
source elements in the transmit region are pointing in the direction, we compare the efficiency with that due to a transmit
dipole pointing in the direction. The two curves match well.
This numerical example reveals that dipole-source analysis is a
good approximation, and much higher efficiency is possible if
transmit sources can orient freely.
C. Local SAR Calculations
With a finite dimensional source, we can investigate the distribution of heat absorption inside tissue. From which, we can
obtain the transmit magnetic moment that satisfies the safety
guidelines. As the transmit source is close to the tissue, we adopt

;d ;d

) = (1 cm, 1.2 cm, 1.7

Fig. 9. Received power distribution at 1 GHz for A = (2 cm) ; A = (2
mm) ; Z = 5:6 
, and receive dipole (left) tilted 45 and (right) pointing in
the z direction.

the safety guidelines for specific absorption rate (SAR). In the
IEEE guideline, the SAR limits are 1.6 W/kg for any 1 g of tissue
and 4 W/kg for any 10 g of tissue. In the ICNIRP guideline, the
SAR limit is 4 W/kg for any 10 g of tissue in hands, wrists, feet,
and ankles, and 2 W/kg for any 10 g of other tissue. In general,
1 g of tissue approximately occupies 1 cm and 10 g of tissue
occupies 2.15 cm . That is, the tissue absorption should not exceed 1.6 mW in 1 cm and 20 mW to 40 mW in 2.15 cm .
We consider a square loop of width 2 cm at a distance 1 cm
above the air-tissue interface and an air-skin-fat-muscle multi(1 cm, 1.2 cm, 1.7 cm).
layered medium with
equal to 1 Am and compute the SAR
We first assume
distribution. Then, we scale the SAR distribution by a factor
such that the maximum value of the scaled distribution equals to
1.6 mW/cm . This scaling factor also gives the transmit current
which is 280 mA. Fig. 8 plots the SAR distribution at 1 GHz
after scaling. The corresponding received power distributions
are plotted in Fig. 9 for two receive dipole orientations. At an
cm), the received power is 67
implant depth of 2 cm (
W for a dipole tilted 45 and 150 W for a dipole pointing
in the direction. If the less stringent SAR limit is used, the
received power will be increased by approximately 10 times.
As a result, sub-mW to mW of power can be safely delivered to
a mm-sized receive antenna from a cm-sized transmit antenna
with a separation of a few cm at carrier frequency of 1 GHz.

POON et al.: OPTIMAL FREQUENCY FOR WIRELESS POWER TRANSMISSION INTO DISPERSIVE TISSUE

Fig. 10. 3D view of the transmit coil, the receive coil, and the tissue model in
IE3D.

V. OPTIMAL FREQUENCY WITH CONJUGATE MATCHING
AT RECEIVER
.
The received power depends on the load impedance
In the inductively coupled link, the load impedance is chosen
to achieve a given output voltage. Various tuning configurations—series vs. shunt tuning—are then chosen to maximize
the power transfer efficiency. Shunt tuning at receiver and
series tuning at transmitter is commonly used. At 1 GHz or
above, the mutual impedance between the transmit and the
receive antennas is no longer purely imaginary as in the inductive link. We should use a different approach and model
the power link as a two-port network. As our objective is to
maximize the power transfer efficiency, we should perform
simultaneously conjugate matching at both transmitter and
receiver. The output voltage requirement is then fulfilled by
the choice of different forms of matching network. As a result,
in the definition of
in (6) is related
the load impedance
to the self-impedance of the receive antenna. At conjugate
matching, the total impedance of port 2 is approximately equal
to 2 times the real part of the self-impedance and half of the
power absorbed by port 2 goes to the load. Therefore, the load
in the definition of
can be chosen to be 4
impedance
times the real part of the self-impedance. In the last section, we
which is 4 times the resistance of a 2-mm
choose
side square copper loop with a trace width of 0.20 mm and
trace thickness of 0.04 mm.
As the self-impedance of the receive antenna changes with
changes with frequency
frequency, the optimal choice of
as well. To understand the effect of load impedance on the optimal frequency, we perform electromagnetic simulations. We
use Zeland IE3D full-wave electromagnetic field solver [24] to
obtain the S-parameters for the 2-port system in Fig. 10. The
tissue model is the air-skin-fat-muscle planarly layered structure
with same thicknesses as in previous examples. The frequency
dependence of the tissue dielectric properties is imported to

1747

Fig. 11. Simulated matched power gain versus frequency for transmit coil of
cm.
width (solid line) 2 cm and (dotted line) 2 mm, and d d

0 =2

the simulator according to the dielectric model in [23]. Both
transmit and receive coils are single-turn. The transmit coil is
a 2-cm side square copper loop with a trace width of 2.00 mm
and trace thickness of 0.04 mm. The receive coil is a 2-mm side
square copper loop with a trace width of 0.20 mm and trace
thickness of 0.04 mm. The transmit coil is in parallel with the
tissue interface and is 1 cm above it, while the receive coil is
tilted 45 and is 2 cm below the interface. Both coils are axially
aligned.
Fig. 11 plots the variation of matched power gain with frequency. The loss in the matched power gain includes not only
tissue absorption but also ohmic loss in both coils and radiation
loss from the transmit coil. At low frequency, the ohmic loss
dominates but its rate of increase with frequency is less than that
of the received power. As a result, the power gain increases with
frequency. The rate of increase reduces when loss from induced
current dominates. Finally, it decreases steeply with frequency
when dielectric loss dominates.
The optimal frequency for the 2-cm side transmit coil shifts
to the sub-GHz range due to radiation loss. The wavelength at 1
GHz is about 4 cm and therefore, radiation loss plays a role in the
sub-GHz range. When a smaller transmit coil is used (dotted line
in Fig. 11), the optimal frequency remains in the GHz-range.
This suggests that we should consider using an antenna array
in the GHz-range. The array pattern can be controlled to maximize the received power while minimizing the total tissue absorption and local SAR. Similar technique is applied to hyperthermia operating in the GHz-range. In hyperthermia, there is
an optimal frequency when an array of applicators is used, but
such an optimal frequency does not exist for a single applicator.
Here, power delivery to an implant has an optimal frequency
even for a single transmit antenna.
VI. CONCLUSION
Wireless power transmission into biological tissue usually
operates below 10 MHz, and quasi-static approximation and

1748

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 5, MAY 2010

transformer model are commonly used in the analysis of the
power link. In this paper, we perform full-wave analysis and
model the power link as a generalized two-port network. The
optimal frequency is in the GHz-range when the dimension of
the transmit antenna is much smaller than a wavelength. It shifts
to the sub-GHz range when the dimension is comparable to a
wavelength. This suggests that we should consider using an antenna array to increase the power transfer efficiency, similar to
focused hyperthermia. As the optimal frequency is about 2 order
of magnitude higher than what is used today, dramatic receiver
miniaturization is feasible. In addition, operating at higher frequency desensitizes the effect of receive coil orientation as now
it is no longer in the near field of the transmitter. To exploit
these advantages require new models and new circuit design
techniques which can be the directions for future research in
this area.
APPENDIX

Similarly, the

’s in Cartesian coordinates can be written as

A. Expressions for Field Components in (38a)–(38b)
The
’s in Cartesian coordinates can be written in terms
of the TE and TM components

The corresponding TE and TM components are given by

Defining
and
, the TE
and TM components for in the th layer are given by

POON et al.: OPTIMAL FREQUENCY FOR WIRELESS POWER TRANSMISSION INTO DISPERSIVE TISSUE

In the above expressions, the generalized reflection coefficients
and amplitudes
can be obtained from the following recursive relations:

where the reflection coefficients for the TE and TM components
are

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Prof. W.-C. Chew for the
useful discussions and valuable comments.
REFERENCES
[1] J. C. Schuder, H. E. Stephenson Jr., and J. F. Townsend, “High-level
electromagnetic energy transfer through a closed chest wall,” IRE Int.
Conv. Record, vol. 9, pp. 119–126, 1961.
[2] J. C. Schuder, J. H. Gold, H. Stoeckle, and J. A. Holland, “The relationship between the electric field in a semi-infinite conductive region
and the power input to a circular coil on or above the surface,” Med.
Biol. Eng., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 227–234, Mar. 1976.
[3] F. C. Flack, E. D. James, and D. M. Schlapp, “Mutual inductance of
air-cored coils: Effect on design of radio-frequency coupled implants,”
Med. Biol. Eng., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 79–85, Mar. 1971.
[4] D. C. Galbraith, “An Implantable Multichannel Neural Stimulator,”
Ph.D. dissertation, Stanford University, , Dec. 1984.
[5] W. J. Heetderks, “RF powering of millimeter- and submillimeter-sized
neural prosthetic implants,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 35, no. 5,
pp. 323–327, May 1988.
[6] W. H. Ko, S. P. Liang, and C. D. Fung, “Design of radio-frequency
powered coils for implant instruments,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comp., vol.
15, pp. 634–640, 1977.
[7] I. C. Forster, “Theoretical design and implementation of transcutaneous
multichannel stimulator for neural prostheses applications,” J. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 3, pp. 107–120, Apr. 1981.
[8] N. N. Donaldson and T. A. Perkins, “Analysis of resonant coupled coils
in the design of radio-frequency transcutaneous links,” Med. Biol. Eng.
Comput., vol. 21, pp. 612–627, Sep. 1983.
[9] E. S. Hochmair, “System optimization for improved accuracy in transcutaneous signal and power transmission,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 31, pp. 177–186, Feb. 1984.
[10] P. E. K. Donaldson, “Frequency-hopping in R.F. energy-transfer links,”
Electron. Wireless World, pp. 24–26, Aug. 1986.
[11] C. M. Zierhofer and E. S. Hochmair, “High-efficiency coupling-insensitive transcutaneous power and data transmission via an inductive
link,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 37, no. 7, pp. 716–722, Jul. 1990.

1749

[12] C. M. Zierhofer and E. S. Hochmair, “Geometric approach for
coupling enhancement of magnetically coupled coils,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 43, no. 7, pp. 708–714, Jul. 1996.
[13] T. Akin, K. Najafi, and R. M. Bradley, “A wireless implantable multichannel digital neural recording system for a micromachined sieve
electrode,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 109–118,
Jan. 1998.
[14] W. Liu, K. Vichienchom, M. Clements, S. C. DeMarco, C. Hughes, E.
McGucken, M. S. Humayun, E. de Juan, J. D. Weiland, and R. Greenberg, “A neuro-stimulus chip with telemetry unit for retinal prosthetic
device,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 1487–1497,
Oct. 2000.
[15] C. Sauer, M. Stanac´evic´, G. Cauwenberghs, and N. Thakor, “Power
harvesting and telemetry in CMOS for implanted devices,” IEEE Trans.
Circuits Syst. I, vol. 52, no. 12, pp. 2605–2613, Dec. 2005.
[16] M. W. Baker and R. Sarpeshkar, “Feedback analysis and design of RF
power link for low-power bionic systems,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 28–38, Mar. 2007.
[17] J. Kim and Y. Rahmat-Samii, “Implanted antennas inside a human
body: Simulations, designs, and characterizations,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1934–1943, Aug. 2004.
[18] P. Soontornpipit, C. M. Furse, and Y. C. Chung, “Design of implantable microstrip antenna for communication with medical
implants,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 52, no. 8, pp.
1944–1951, Aug. 2004.
[19] L. Wang, T. Drysdale, and D. R. S. Cumming, “In situ characterization
of two wireless transmission schemes for ingestible capsules,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 2020–2027, Nov. 2007.
[20] S. Soora, K. Gosalia, M. Humayun, and G. Lazzi, “A comparison of
two and three dimensional dipole antennas for an implantable retinal
prosthesis,” IEEE Antennas Propag., vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 622–629, Mar.
2008.
[21] A. V. Vorst, A. Rosen, and Y. Kotsuka, RF/Microwave Interaction
With Biological Tissues. Hoboken-Piscataway, NJ: Wiley-IEEE
Press, 2006.
[22] H. Ling, S.-W. Lee, and W. Gee, “Frequency optimization of focused
microwave hyperthermia applicators,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 72, no. 2, pp.
224–225, Feb. 1984.
[23] S. Gabriel, R. W. Lau, and C. Gabriel, “The dielectric properties of
biological tissues: III. Parametric models for the dielectric spectrum of
tissues,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 41, no. 11, pp. 2271–2293, Nov. 1996.
[24] IE3D Version 12.2 Zeland Software Inc.
[25] J. B. Andersen, “Theoretical limitations on radiation into muscle
tissue,” Int. J. Hyperthermia, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 45–55, Jan. 1985.
[26] W. C. Chew, Waves and Fields in Inhomogeneous Media. New York:
IEEE Press, 1995.
[27] J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, 3rd ed. New York: Wiley,
1998.
[28] T. J. Cui and W. C. Chew, “Fast evaluation of sommerfeld integrals
for EM scattering and radiation by three-dimensional buried objects,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sensing, vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 887–900, Mar.
1999.

Ada S. Y. Poon (S’98–M’04) received the B.Eng.
and M.Phil. degrees in electrical and electronic engineering from the University of Hong Kong, in 1996
and 1997, respectively, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering and computer sciences
from the University of California at Berkeley, in 1999
and 2004, respectively.
In 2004, she was a Senior Research Scientist at
Intel Corporation, Santa Clara, CA. In 2005, she was
a Senior Technical Fellow at SiBeam, Inc., Fremont,
CA. In 2006–2007, she was an Assistant Professor at
the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign. Since 2008, she has been at the Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, where she is currently an Assistant Professor. Her current research interests focus on the applications of electrical engineering to advance surgical instruments, and in vivo diagnostics and therapeutic
treatments.

1750

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 5, MAY 2010

Stephen O’Driscoll (S’03–M’09) received the B.E.
degree in electrical engineering from University
College Cork, Ireland, in 2001 and the M.Sc. and
Ph.D. degrees also in electrical engineering from
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, in 2005 and
2009, respectively.
During 1999 and 2000, he developed an RF
front end for 77 GHz radar at Farran Technology,
Ballincollig, Ireland. From 2001 to 2003, he was
with Cypress Semiconductor, San Jos, CA, where
he worked on analog circuit design for clock and
data recovery PLLs for wireline communications in both SiGe BiCMOS and
CMOS processes. Since August 2009, he has been an Assistant Professor in the
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California,
Davis, where his research focus is on analog and RF IC design for biomedical
and other low power applications, wireless power transfer, system configured
analog circuits and analog optimization tools.
Dr. O’Driscoll was a recipient of the Lu Stanford Graduate Fellowship.

Teresa H. Meng (S’82–M’83–SM’93–F’99) received the B.S. degree from National Taiwan
University, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in EECS
from the University of California at Berkeley.
Currently, she is the Reid Weaver Dennis Professor
of Electrical Engineering at Stanford University,
Stanford, CA. Her research activities during the first
10 years at Stanford focused on low-power circuit
and system design, video signal processing, and
wireless communications. In 1999, she took leave
from Stanford and founded Atheros Communications, Inc., which is a leading developer of semiconductor system solutions
for wireless network communications products. She returned to Stanford
University in 2000 to continue her research and teaching at the University. Her
current research interests are bio-implant technologies, neural signal processing
and non-invasive medical treatments using focused EM energy. She is the
author of one book, several book chapters, and over 200 technical articles in
journals and conferences.
Dr. Meng is a Fellow of the IEEE and a member of the National Academy
of Engineering. She has received many awards and honors, including the 2009
IEEE Donald O. Pederson Award, the DEMO Lifetime Achievement Award, the
McKnight Technological Innovations in Neurosciences Award in 2007, the Distinguished Lecturer Award from the IEEE Signal Processing Society in 2004,
the Bosch Faculty Scholar Award in 2003, Innovator of the Year Award by MIT
Sloan School eBA in 2002 and the CIO 20/20 Vision Award in 2002. She was
named one of the Top 10 Entrepreneurs by Red Herring in 2001 and received a
Best Paper Award from the IEEE Signal Processing Society, an NSF Presidential Young Investigator Award, an ONR Young Investigator Award, and an IBM
Faculty Development Award, all in 1989, and the Eli Jury Award from U.C.
Berkeley in 1988. She has given plenary talks at major conferences in the areas
of signal processing and wireless communications.

