IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 5, MAY 2010

1551

Analysis and Design of Ultra Thin Electromagnetic
Absorbers Comprising Resistively Loaded High
Impedance Surfaces
Filippo Costa, Student Member, IEEE, Agostino Monorchio, Senior Member, IEEE, and
Giuliano Manara, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—High-impedance surfaces (HIS) comprising lossy frequency selective surfaces (FSS) are employed to design thin electromagnetic absorbers. The structure, despite its typical resonant behavior, is able to perform a very wideband absorption in a reduced
thickness. Losses in the frequency selective surface are introduced
by printing the periodic pattern through resistive inks and hence
avoiding the typical soldering of a large number of lumped resistors. The effect of the surface resistance of the FSS and dielectric
substrate characteristics on the input impedance of the absorber
is discussed by means of a circuital model. It is shown that the optimum value of surface resistance is affected both by substrate parameters (thickness and permittivity) and by FSS element shape.
The equivalent circuit model is then used to introduce the working
principles of the narrowband and the wideband absorbing structure and to derive the best-suited element for wideband absorption.
Index Terms—Artificial magnetic conductor (AMC), electromagnetic absorbers, high-impedance surfaces (HIS), metamaterial
absorber, radar absorbing material (RAM), resistive frequency
selective surfaces (RFSS).

I. INTRODUCTION
ECENT developments in the synthesis of novel metamaterials, exhibiting anomalous electromagnetic properties,
have increased interest in planar frequency selective surfaces,
because of their great versatility and simple manufacturing procedures. These surfaces can be employed in front of a grounded
dielectric slab to synthesize high-impedance surfaces [1]–[3].
Several attempts to employ these complex materials for improving the performance of classical electromagnetic absorbers
have been made in last years [4]–[17]. This technology allows
approaching the physical limitations about the thickness bandwidth ratio [18], [19]. Thin narrow band absorbers employing
metallic FSS loaded with a large number of lumped resistors
have been repeatedly proposed [6]–[9]. Loaded high-impedance
surfaces (HIS) surfaces can be also employed to synthesize thin
and wideband absorbers [10]–[16]. The use of lumped resistors
for introducing ohmic losses in a metallic surface leads to complex and expensive structures because of the cost of high fre-

R

Manuscript received March 12, 2009; revised October 04, 2009; accepted
November 23, 2009. Date of publication March 01, 2010; date of current version
May 05, 2010.
The authors are with Department of Information Engineering, University
of Pisa, 56122-Pisa, Italy (e-mail: filippo.costa@iet.unipi.it; a.monorchio@iet.unipi.it; g.manara@iet.unipi.it).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TAP.2010.2044329

quency resistors and complexity of the manufacturing. An attractive alternative to this approach consists in printing the frequency selective surface through resistive inks with a proper surface resistance [12]–[14]. Some design rules for designing resistive loaded HIS absorbers are presented in [17] where they are
referred to as circuit analog absorbers. However, the theory in
the book is specific to the wideband design and experimental
verifications are not shown. A specific theory of narrowband
structures and a useful methodology for choosing the right surface resistance of the FSS is not available. A practical realization
of resistive patterns employed in thin absorbers can be found in
[13] and in [14]. Nevertheless, in these papers, a non optimal
design is obtained due to absence of designing principles.
Here, we present an analysis of the absorbing structure by a
simple equivalent circuit that allows a detailed explanation of
the key parameters for the design of the absorber. We show that
the optimum surface resistance of the ink composing the FSS
depends on the unit cell shape, on the distance of the FSS from
the ground plane and on the substrate permittivity. Finally, the
experimental verification of the absorbing structure is presented.
The paper is organized as follows: in the next Section, the
structure under analysis is described by means of an equivalent
circuit approach; in Section III the relation between the FSS
surface resistance and the lumped resistance of the equivalent
circuit is clarified. Section IV shows an example of thin absorber for narrow-band absorption. Some considerations about
the bandwidth of the device, keeping constant the dielectric
thickness, are presented in order to determine the best-suited
FSS element. In Section V the theory of the wideband configuration is presented together with a practical design example.
Finally in Section V the experimental results of both the narrowband and the wideband configuration are shown.
II. PROPOSED CONFIGURATION AND CIRCUIT MODEL
The absorbing panel consists of a conventional highimpedance surface comprising lossy frequency selective surfaces over a thin grounded dielectric slab (see Fig. 1). The FSS
array, made up of capacitive cells, behaves as a capacitor in
the low frequency region but its impedance becomes inductive
after the first resonance.
The impedance of a lossy FSS can be represented through a
series RLC circuit:

0018-926X/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE

(1)

1552

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 5, MAY 2010

The relation in (7) highlights the dependence of the optimal FSS
resistance on thickness and permittivity of the substrate. From
(7), it is evident that the thicker is the substrate (given by ), the
higher is the optimal FSS surface resistance.
III. RELATION BETWEEN LUMPED CIRCUIT RESISTANCE
AND FSS SURFACE RESISTANCE

Fig. 1. Three-dimensional sketch of the analyzed configuration.

The shape of FSS influences the values of L and C parameters.
is equal to
The surface impedance of the absorbing structure
and
the parallel connection between the FSS impedance
the surface impedance of the grounded dielectric slab :
(2)
The thin grounded dielectric slab behaves as an inductor. Its
impedance can be computed analytically as follows:
(3)
where
;
are the characteristic impedances of the slab for TE and TM polarization,
is the propagation constant along the normal
unit of the slab and
is the transverse wavenumber
with representing the incidence angle of the incoming wave
with respect to the normal.
After some analytical manipulations, the real and the imagican be derived:
nary part of the input impedance
(4)
(see (5) at bottom of page). When the inductive impedance of
the substrate
and the imaginary part of the FSS impedance
assume the same value, the parallel circuit
resonates and the impedance
becomes purely real (for thin
substrates) and equal to:
(6)
In order to obtain absorption of the incoming signal, the
impedance expressed in (6) should match the free space
impedance
(7)

In order to derive the optimal surface resistance from the
equivalent circuit, a relation between the lumped resistance
of the equivalent circuit and the surface resistance of the FSS
has to be defined. In a strict sense, the optimal surface resisif the ink
tance of the lossy layer would be exactly equal to
coating were uniform. If the layer is not uniform, as in the case
of an FSS, the surface resistance depends not only on the parameters defined in (7), namely thickness and dielectric constant of
the substrate, but more remarkably, also on the unit cell shape.
In particular, the scattering surface area per unit cell is larger
in the uniform sheet model than the physical scatterer [20]. As
a good estimate, the addition of losses is accounted by a series
load resistance of value
(8)
where
, is the cell periodicity and is the surface
area of the lossy element within a single unit cell. The relation
(8) implies that the smaller is the scattering area, the smaller is
the surface resistance that generates a certain fixed lumped resistance (same amount of losses). This formula holds very well
for patch type FSSs but, when resonant shapes such as rings or
crosses are considered, the surface area is represented only
by the surface area of the element along the direction of the current (parallel to the incoming electric field). In a cross FSS, for
instance, such area is the area of one of the two crossed dipoles
composing the element. In the case of a ring shaped FSS, the relation (8) slightly underestimates the lumped resistance since
the current in the ring is split in two segments parallel to the electric field. Indeed, considering a cross and a ring element with
the same surface area, it can be easily realized that the current
density on the two narrow strips of the ring is higher than the
current density on the cross element. Nevertheless, a rigorous
calculation of the lumped resistance can be performed by imposing the power dissipated in the equivalent transmission line
equal to the power lost in the unit cell of the lossy element. For
a freestanding lossy FSS, the power dissipated in the resistor of
the equivalent transmission line reads
(9)
where
represents the incoming voltage directly proportional
to the incident electric field, is the free space impedance,

(5)

COSTA et al.: ANALYSIS AND DESIGN OF ULTRA THIN ELECTROMAGNETIC ABSORBERS

Fig. 2. Real and imaginary part of the impedance Z with different thicknesses
of the substrate. The FSS shape is a patch with a ratio P = L=D of 10/16. The
surface resistance is always equal to 50 
=sq.

is the reflection coefficient computed in correspondence of the
position of the FSS, represents the lumped resistance of the
of the FSS and is the reactance due to the inductance and the
capacitance of the specific element. The power lost in the unit
cell of the real structure is computed as follows:
(10)
Alternatively, the exact value of lumped resistance can be obtained after a full wave simulation of a freestanding FSS by computing the real part of the FSS impedance [21]. Such parameter
is constant up to frequencies where the unit cell is reasonably
homogeneous and it corresponds to the value of the resistance
in the lumped circuit.
The approximate lumped model here presented allows to acquire a valuable insight into the physical principles of the structure. In order to validate the effectiveness of the formulas, in
Fig. 2 the real and the imaginary part of the input impedance of
, are shown. An impinging wave is absorbed
the absorber,
by the resistive HIS when the input impedance matches the free
space impedance. The purpose of the graph is to show that, for a
), an ingiven surface resistance of the FSS (e.g.
crease of the substrate thickness (keeping constant the operating
frequency and therefore the wavelength) leads to an increase of
according to (4). The considered FSS shape
the real part of
is a square patch with a ratio between the side length and
the cell periodicity
equal to 10/16. The lumped resistance
of the approximate RLC circuit is computed according to (8)
and the L, C values have been obtained by employing the in,
at
version method proposed in [21] (
). In order to obtain an increase of the thickness
with respect to the wavelength, the same resonance frequency
is maintained by changing the unit cell periodicity. This variation leads to a rescaling of the L and C lumped parameters [21]
but, as predicted by (4) and (6), their values do not influence

1553

Fig. 3. Reflection coefficient of the narrow-band HIS absorber with different
cell shapes. Substrate parameters: thickness = 1 mm, " = 1.

the maximum value of
patches is equal to 50

. The surface resistance of the
in all cases.

IV. NARROW BAND CONFIGURATION
The presented approach can be employed to synthesize an
ultra-thin narrow band absorber. The best-suited FSS shape
for achieving the largest operating band with a fixed substrate
(thickness and permittivity) is the patch element with a narrow
gap between adjacent metalized squares [22].
In Fig. 3 the reflection coefficients of the HIS absorber obtained with different cell shapes are shown. The lossy frequency
selective surface is printed on a grounded air slab with a thickat the operating frequency.
ness of 1 mm corresponding to
It can be noticed that the optimal surface resistance is higher for
cells with a high percentage of printed surface within the unit
cell. Indeed, according to (8), a cell with a small ratio between
the surface area of the lossy element and the unit cell area
generates the same value of equivalent lumped resistance with
a smaller surface resistance.
The use of substrates with high dielectric permittivity generates angular stabilization of the operating frequency but also a
strong bandwidth reduction. The employment of vias results a
good solution to enlarge and stabilize the bandwidth of the absorber for oblique TM polarization [23].
V. WIDEBAND CONFIGURATION
As highlighted through the circuital approach, in correspondence of the resonance frequency generated by the parallel
between the capacitive impedance of the FSS and the inductive impedance of the grounded dielectric slab, the value of
the real part of the input impedance increases. This allows
to synthesize a good absorber in correspondence of the HIS
resonances. By choosing an FSS shape that resonates well
before the grating lobes, as for instance crosses or rings, a
second parallel resonance between the FSS and the grounded
substrate can be generated. Such resonance is obtained when

1554

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 5, MAY 2010

Fig. 4. Impedance of a 5 mm grounded air slab and impedance of a ring shaped
. The resonances of the HIS are highlighted.
FSS with periodicity

D = 11 mm

the inductive impedance of the FSS assumes the same value of
the capacitive impedance of the substrate. As is well known, a
grounded dielectric substrate behaves as a capacitance when
its thickness becomes thicker than a quarter wavelength. It is
therefore necessary employing a slightly thicker substrate to
obtain a capacitive behavior in the frequency range of interest.
The choice of a rather thick substrate guarantees a sufficiently
also between the two parallel
high value of the real part of
resonances. In addition, at the center of the operating band, the
substrate thickness equals
acting as a high-impedance wall
while the FSS impedance turns from capacitive to inductive behavior showing a purely real impedance. These circumstances
allow the structure working as a conventional Salisbury screen
[24], [25] at the center of the operating band [17]. The working
principles of the structure can be also graphically explained
considering a test example. Let us consider an FSS composed
by a ring array, with a periodicity
equal to 11 mm and a
surface resistance
of 70
, printed on a air grounded
dielectric substrate with a thickness of 5 mm (see the three-dimensional sketch of the analyzed absorbing structure reported
in Fig. 1).
In Fig. 4 the impedance of the grounded dielectric substrate
and the impedance of the FSS, computed by retrieving full wave
data of reflection coefficient, are reported. The two resonances
previously mentioned and the Salisbury screen zone are highlighted in the figure. By increasing the value of , the real part
of
is lowered in correspondence of the resonances and into obtain a wide
creased between them. An optimal value of
is around 400 corfrequency range where the real part of
. The second maximum of
falls
responds to 70
before the second resonance of the HIS since its value is dominated by the square of the substrate impedance [see relation
(6)] that has a deep minimum below the second resonance. In
Fig. 5 the reflection coefficient of the absorber obtained by a
periodic method of moments (MoM) code, by the equivalent

Fig. 5. Reflection coefficient of the analyzed structure: Ring shaped FSS over
a grounded air slab of 5 mm.

circuit approach and by Ansoft HFSS v.10 is reported. In the
circuital approach the lumped resistance is computed with a
moderate correction to the relation (8) in agreement to what argued in the Section III. The absorbing structure allows obtaining
remarkable performance ( 15 dB in the band from 7 GHz to
20 GHz) with an overall thickness of 5 mm only. This performance cannot be accomplished by lightweight configurations
employing optimized Jaumann screen [26] or by other commercially available non-magnetic multilayer structures (see for instance [27]) with a thickness lower than 9–10 mm.
Despite the intrinsic periodicity of the structure, its dimension
can be reduced down to a 4 by 4 array preserving almost the
same absorption performances, with respect to a PEC plate of
the same dimensions.
The absorber here presented does not redirect the energy in
other directions as in other RAM designs [28] but it dissipates
the incoming power by realizing the matching condition over a
wide frequency range. The energy would be reflected in other directions only if the FSS period were larger than one wavelength
(as it happens in the [13]). In the present design the redirection
of the energy toward the grating lobes starts after 27 GHz.
For the sake of completeness we report in Fig. 6 the behavior
of the absorber for oblique incidence.
The absorption of the structure is acceptable up to 30 degrees but it starts to deteriorate after 45 degrees. However, it is
worth to underline that the aim of the present paper is to present
and discuss the absorption mechanisms of this kind of structure, and not to optimize an absorber for oblique incidence angles. Methods for improving the performance of the absorber
for oblique incidence consists in employing an additional upper
dielectric as in [11] or by optimizing the design through an iterative technique.
VI. EXPERIMENTAL VERIFICATION
The feasibility of the thin structures is demonstrated by two
experimental prototypes. The resistive patterns representing the

COSTA et al.: ANALYSIS AND DESIGN OF ULTRA THIN ELECTROMAGNETIC ABSORBERS

Fig. 6. Reflection coefficient for oblique incidence angles of the analyzed absorber based on the ring FSS over a 5 mm air slab.

1555

Fig. 8. Measured reflection coefficient of the sample shown in Fig. 7 compared
to the computed result. Measured data are reported up to 8.6 GHz because of
limitation of the available network analyzer.

Fig. 7. A picture of a narrow band absorber. The overall thickness is equal to
2.4 mm.
Fig. 9. A picture of a wideband absorber. Overall thickness equal to 5 mm. (a)
front view, (b) side view.

lossy frequency selective surfaces have been manufactured by
the silk printing technique through a photo etched frame. A picture of the narrowband sample is shown in Fig. 7 and the measured reflection coefficient, compared with simulated result, is
plotted in Fig. 8.
In this example, the FSS consists of a patch array with a periodicity of 10 mm and a ratio between the side length of the
element and the cell periodicity equal to 12/16. As shown in
Section IV, the use of the patch type FSS guarantees the largest
possible bandwidth [22].
The surface resistance of the square patches is equal to 35
and the substrate is the commercial FR4 with permittivity
. The overall thickness of the absorber
equal to
at the resonant frequency.
is 2.4 mm that corresponds to
The bandwidth is comparable to the one achievable by a conventional Salisbury configuration.
The prototype of the wideband configuration is similar to the
one previously analyzed in the Section V. Both a Kapton substrate and a slim FR4 substrate of 0.15 mm have been used
to pattern the resistive FSS. The use of FR4 substrate requires

a slight modification of the ring periodicity (12 mm). The air
spacer has been created by employing a Rohacell substrate with
a relative permittivity of 1.05-j0.017. A picture of the wideband
sample is shown in Fig. 9. The manufactured structure results
in a very lightweight configuration, indeed a 30 cm 30 cm
sample weighs 10 g compared with the 450 g of a commercial
magnetically loaded absorber (Eccosorb [29]) with the same dimensions.
In Fig. 10 we present the measured reflection coefficient of
two samples realized by different paints (one declared for 70
end the other one for 10
) compared with the computed results. It results that the first prototype, referred as prototype , is characterized by a surface resistance of roughly 130
and the second configuration (prototype ) is character.
ized by a surface resistance of 20
The results are not the optimal ones presented in the previous
simulations but they are presented in order to verify the design methodology. The paints employed in the manufacturing

1556

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 5, MAY 2010

well known expression for computing the surface impedance
is valid:
(A1)
where is the conductivity of the material and represents the
skin depth. The expression of the skin depth of a material reads:
(A2)
where is the operating radian frequency and is the permeability of the material. When the conductivity of the material
is lowered, the skin depth of the material becomes rather larger
than the sheet thickness. In this case a boundary condition for
thin slabs has to be employed. In [25] the surface impedance of
a thin homogeneous slab (of thickness ) is defined as follows:
(A3)

Fig. 10. Measured Reflection coefficient of the sample in Fig. 9 compared with
the computed result.

process need to be mixed for obtaining the right surface resistance value, but this represents a practical issue that goes beyond
the scope of this paper.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper we have provided a detailed explanation of thin
absorbers based on high-impedance surfaces. The absorber consists of a lossy frequency selective surface placed above a thin
grounded dielectric slab. The absorbing structure can be employed for synthesizing both thin narrowband and wideband
absorbers that strongly outperform the conventional Salisbury
and Jaumann configurations. In the present work, the lossy FSS
has been synthesized by printing a resistive pattern trough resistive inks. The use of resistive patterns provides a dramatically simpler and lightweight structure with respect to the design including a large number of lumped resistors. By means of
a lumped equivalent circuit, we have determined simple rules
for choosing the optimal surface resistance of the FSS. Indeed,
this latter represents the key parameter of the structure. We have
showed that its optimal value depends on the FSS shape and on
the substrate parameters. The working principles of thin narrowband and wideband absorbers have been addressed by the same
model. Computational and experimental results have been presented to verify the two analyzed configurations.
APPENDIX
SURFACE RESISTANCE
The surface resistance is defined to represent a slab of lossy
and conductivity . A resistive
material, with thickness
sheet whose properties are entirely specified by the single
can be analyzed as an
measurable quantity
infinitesimal sheet by a MoM code. However, various definitions of this parameter are available in literature. When the
thickness of the sheet is much larger than the wavelength the

under two restrictions:
,
. From
condition is verified, is always
(A3) it results that, if
positive and its imaginary part is negligible.
Another formulation for the surface impedance boundary
condition was introduced in 1903 by Levi-Cività and Picciati
[30]. By rewriting the relation in a form similar to (A3) we
obtain:
(A4)
valid on the assumption that
. The relations
(A3) and (A4) differ only for a correction on the permittivity
of the material that does not cause appreciable variations. It is
worth underlining that, when the imaginary part of the dielectric
permittivity is much larger than the real part, the relation (A3)
and (A4) are well approximated by the static definition of the
surface impedance
(A5)
In the analyzed frequency range, this approximation is valid if
(A6)
Considering a resistive FSS with a thickness of 25
(typical
for commercial inks), this condition leads to a superior limit of
(if
) for replacing the condition (A5)
roughly 1000
to the more general (A3) and (A4). Beyond this limit, the value
of the surface impedance is no longer purely real.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Clavijo, R. E. Dıaz, and W. E. McKinzie, III, “Design methodology
for Sievenpiper high-impedance surfaces: An artificial magnetic conductor for positive gain electrically small antennas,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 51, no. 10, pp. 2678–2690, 2003.
[2] O. Luukkonen, C. Simovski, G. Granet, G. Goussetis, D. Lioubtchenko, A. V. Räisänen, and S. A. Tretyakov, “Simple and
accurate analytical model of planar grids and high-impedance surfaces
comprising metal strips or patches,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag.,
vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 1624–1632, 2008.

COSTA et al.: ANALYSIS AND DESIGN OF ULTRA THIN ELECTROMAGNETIC ABSORBERS

[3] D. J. Kern, D. H. Werner, A. Monorchio, L. Lanuzza, and M. J. Wilhelm, “The design synthesis of multiband artificial magnetic conductors using high impedance frequency selective surfaces,” IEEE Trans.
Antennas Propag., vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 8–17, 2005.
[4] N. Engheta, “Thin absorbing screen using metamaterial surfaces,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. on Antennas Propag., 2002, vol. 2, pp. 392–395.
[5] D. J. Kern and D. H. Werner, “A genetic algorithm approach to the
design of ultra-thin electromagnetic bandgap absorbers,” Microw. Opt.
Technol. Lett., vol. 38, pp. 61–64, 2003.
[6] S. Simms and V. Fusco, “Tunable thin radar absorber using artificial
magnetic ground plane with variable backplane,” Electron. Lett., vol.
42, no. 21, pp. 1197–1198, 2006.
[7] H. Mosallaei and K. Sarabandi, “A one-layer ultra-thin meta-surface
absorber,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. on Antennas Propag., Washington
DC, Jul. 2005.
[8] C. Mias and J. H. Yap, “A varactor-tunable high impedance surface
with a resistive-lumped-element biasing grid,” IEEE Trans. Antennas
Propag., vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 1955–1962, 2007.
[9] M. Amano and Y. Kotsuka, “A novel microwave absorber with surfaceprinted conductive line patterns,” in IEEE MTT-S Digest, Jun. 2002, pp.
1193–1196.
[10] E. F. Knott and C. D Lunden, “The two-sheet capacitive Jaumann absorber,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 43, no. 11, pp. 1339–1343,
1995.
[11] B. Munk, P. Munk, and J. Prior, “On designing Jaumann and circuit
analog absorbers (CA Absorbers) for oblique angle of incidence,” IEEE
Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 55, no. 1, 2007.
[12] F. Costa, A. Monorchio, and G. Manara, “Ultra-thin absorber by
using high impedance surfaces with frequency selective surfaces,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. on Antennas Propag., Honolulu, HI, 2007, pp.
861–864.
[13] H. T. Liu, H. F. Cheng, and Z. Y. Chu et al., “Absorbing properties
of frequency selective surface absorbers with cross-shaped resistive
patches,” Mater. Design, vol. 28, pp. 2166–2171, 2007.
[14] W.-J. Lee, J.-W. Lee, and C. G. Kim, “Characteristics of an electromagnetic wave absorbing composite structure with a conducting
polymer electromagnetic bandgap (EBG) in the X-band,” Composites
Sci. Technol., vol. 68, no. 12, pp. 2485–2489, 2008.
[15] A. Tennant and B. Chambers, “A single-layer tunable microwave absorber using an active FSS,” IEEE Microw. Wireless Compon. Lett.,
vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 46–47, 2004.
[16] A. K. Zadeh and A. Karlsson, “Capacitive circuit method for fast and
efficient design of wideband radar absorbers,” IEEE Trans. Antennas
Propag., vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 2307–2314, 2009.
[17] B. A. Munk, Frequency Selective Surfaces—Theory and Design. New York: Wiley, 2000.
[18] R. M. Fano, “Theoretical limitations on the broadband matching of
arbitrary impedances,” J. Franklin Inst., vol. 249, no. 1–2, pp. 57–83,
Jan 1950, 139–154.
[19] K. N. Rozanov, “Ultimate thickness to bandwidth ratio of radar absorbers,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 48, no. 8, pp. 1230–1234,
2000.
[20] K. W. Whites and R. Mittra, “An equivalent boundary-condition model
for lossy planar periodic structures at low frequencies,” IEEE Trans.
Antennas Propag., vol. 44, no. 12, pp. 1617–1628, 1996.
[21] F. Costa, A. Monorchio, and G. Manara, “An equivalent circuit model
of frequency selective surfaces embedded within dielectric layers,” presented at the IEEE Antennas Propag. Society Int. Symp., Charleston,
SC, Jun. 2009.
[22] F. Costa, S. Genovesi, and A. Monorchio, “On the bandwidth of
high-impedance frequency selective surfaces,” IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 8, pp. 1341, 1344, 2009.
[23] O. Luukkonen, F. Costa, C. R. Simovski, A. Monorchio, and S. A.
Tretyakov, “A thin electromagnetic absorber for wide incidence angles
and both polarizations,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 57, no. 10,
2009.
[24] W. W. Salisbury, “Absorbent Body of Electromagnetic Waves,” U. S.
patent 2,599,944, Jun. 10, 1952.
[25] R. L. Fante and M. T. McCormack, “Reflection properties of the Salisbury screen,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 36, no. 10, pp.
1443–1454, 1988.
[26] B. Chambers and A. Tennant, “Optimized design of Jaumann radar
absorbing materials using a genetic algorithm,” Inst. Elect. Eng. Proc.
Radar Sonar Navigat., vol. 143, pp. 23–30, Jan. 1996.

1557

[27] Laird Technologies Company [Online]. Available: http://www.
lairdtech.com/Products/EMI-Solutions/Specialty-EMI-Solutions/Microwave-Absorbers/
[28] M. Paquay, J.-C. Iriarte, I. Ederra, R. Gonzalo, and P. de Maagt, “Thin
AMC structure for radar cross-section reduction,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 55, no. 12, pp. 3630–3638, 2007.
[29] Emerson and Cuming Microwave product, 28 York Avenue
Randolph, MA, 02368 [Online]. Available: http://www.eccosorb.com/main/Home.html
[30] T. B. A. Senior and J. L. Volakis, Approximate Boundary Conditions
in Electromagnetics, ser. IEE Elecromagnetic Waves Series. London,
U.K.: Inst. Elect. Eng., 1995.

Filippo Costa (S’07) was born in Pisa, Italy, on
October 31, 1980. He received the M.Sc. degree
in telecommunication engineering and the Ph.D.
degree in applied electromagnetism in electrical and
biomedical engineering, electronics, smart sensors,
nano-technologies from the University of Pisa, Pisa,
Italy, in 2006 and 2010, respectively.
From March to August 2009, he was a Visiting Researcher at the Department of Radio Science and Engineering, Helsinki University of Technology, TKK,
Finland. He is currently a Postdoctoral Researcher at
the University of Pisa. His research is focused on the analysis and modelling of
artificial impedance surfaces with emphasis on their application in electromagnetic absorbers and low-profile antennas.

Agostino Monorchio (S’89–M’96–SM’04) received
the Laurea degree in electronics engineering and the
Ph.D. degree in methods and technologies for environmental monitoring from the University of Pisa,
Pisa, Italy, in 1991 and 1994, respectively.
During 1995, he joined the Radio Astronomy
Group, Arcetri Astrophysical Observatory, Florence,
Italy, as a Postdoctoral Research Fellow, in the area
of antennas and microwave systems. He has been
collaborating with the Electromagnetic Communication Laboratory, Pennsylvania State University
(Penn State), University Park, and he is an Affiliate of the Computational
Electromagnetics and Antennas Research Laboratory. He has been a Visiting
Scientist at the University of Granada, Spain, and at the Communication
University of China in Beijing. He is currently an Associate Professor in the
School of Engineering, University of Pisa, and Adjunct Professor at the Italian
Naval Academy of Livorno. He is also an Adjunct Professor in the Department
of Electrical Engineering, Penn State. He is on the Teaching Board of the
Ph.D. course in “Remote Sensing” and on the council of the Ph.D. School
of Engineering “Leonardo da Vinci” at the University of Pisa. His research
interests include the development of novel numerical and asymptotic methods
in applied electromagnetics, both in frequency and time domains, with applications to the design of antennas, microwave systems and RCS calculation, the
analysis and design of frequency-selective surfaces and novel materials, and
the definition of electromagnetic scattering models from complex objects and
random surfaces for remote sensing applications. He has been a reviewer for
many scientific journals and he has been supervising various research projects
related to applied electromagnetics commissioned and supported by national
companies and public institutions.
Dr. Monorchio has served as Associate Editor of the IEEE ANTENNAS AND
WIRELESS PROPAGATION LETTERS. He received a Summa Foundation Fellowship and a NATO Senior Fellowship.

1558

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 5, MAY 2010

Giuliano Manara (F’04) was born in Florence, Italy,
on October 30, 1954. He received the Laurea (Doctor)
degree in electronics engineering (summa cum laude)
from the University of Florence, Italy, in 1979.
Currently, he is a Professor at the College of
Engineering of the University of Pisa, Italy. Since
2000, he has been serving as the President of the
Bachelor and the Master Programs in Telecommunication Engineering at the same University. Since
1980, he has been collaborating with the Department
of Electrical Engineering, Ohio State University,
Columbus, where, in the summer and fall of 1987, he was involved in research
at the ElectroScience Laboratory. His research interests have centered mainly
on the asymptotic solution of radiation and scattering problems to improve and
extend the uniform geometrical theory of diffraction. In this framework, he has
analyzed electromagnetic wave scattering from material bodies, with emphasis

on the scattering from both isotropic and anisotropic impedance wedges. He has
also been engaged in research on numerical, analytical and hybrid techniques
(both in frequency and time domain), scattering from rough surfaces, frequency
selective surfaces (FSS), and electromagnetic compatibility. More recently,
his research has also been focused on the design of microwave antennas with
application to broadband wireless networks, and on the development and
testing of new microwave materials (metamaterials).
Prof. Manara was elected an IEEE Fellow in 2004 for “contributions to the
uniform geometrical theory of diffraction and its applications.” Since 2002, he
has been serving as a member of the IEEE Italy Section Executive Committee.
In May 2004, he was the Chairman of the Local Organizing Committee for the
International Symposium on Electromagnetic Theory of Commission B of the
International Union of Radio Science (URSI). He also served as a Convenor
for several URSI Commission B international conferences, and URSI General
Assemblies. In August 2008, he has been elected Vice-Chair of the International
Commission B of URSI.

