2318

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 7, JULY 2010

Balanced Antipodal Vivaldi Antenna With Dielectric
Director for Near-Field Microwave Imaging
Jeremie Bourqui, Member, IEEE, Michal Okoniewski, Fellow, IEEE, and Elise C. Fear, Member, IEEE

Abstract—A balanced antipodal Vivaldi antenna is designed to
be used as a sensor for a microwave breast cancer detection system.
The antenna has the ability to send short electromagnetic pulses
into the near-field, with low distortion, low loss and in a directional
manner. The antenna directivity is further improved by the inclusion of a novel feature in the antenna aperture called a “director”
which consists of a profiled piece of higher dielectric constant material. Several simulated results are successfully confirmed with measurements. Reflections of a tumor placed in a breast model are simulated for two cases, namely a balanced antipodal Vivaldi antenna
with and without a director. Greater tumor responses are recorded
with the director present, demonstrating the potential of this feature for microwave breast imaging.
Index Terms—Antenna, microwave breast imaging, radar, ultrawideband (UWB).

I. INTRODUCTION

N

EAR-FIELD microwave imaging approaches for exploring interior structures of the body are a topic of
growing interest. For example, assessment of bone, heart and
breast health with microwave techniques has been proposed
[1]–[3]. One approach to biological microwave imaging is
radar-based, which operates by sending a short-time pulse of
microwaves towards the object of interest using one or many
antennas. The reflections are measured and used to create an
image related to the differences in dielectric properties of the
structure. For breast imaging, recent studies indicate a wide
range in dielectric properties of healthy tissues, which appears
to be related to the content of adipose tissues [4]. A second study
showed contrast between healthy and malignant tissues ranging
from 1:10 to 10:11, depending on the adipose content [5]. In
order to reliably sense the reflections from tumors located in tissues ranging from adipose to glandular, a high quality antenna
is required to send and receive short-time microwave pulses
with low distortion and high efficiency. Selective illumination
of the breast may assist in tumor localization. Additionally,
the antenna has to be compact in order to ease its placement
around the breast and to be compatible with prototype imaging
systems. This type of sensor is not commercially available.

Manuscript received January 14, 2009; revised July 15, 2009; accepted January 25, 2010. Date of publication April 22, 2010; date of current version July
08, 2010.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, AB T2N 1N4, Canada
(e-mail: bourquij@ucalgary.ca).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TAP.2010.2048844

Numerous antenna designs for radar-based ultrawideband
(UWB) microwave breast imaging have been reported over
the past decade. For example, stacked-patch [6] and wide slot
[7] antennas have been developed at the University of Bristol.
These antennas are mounted on a hemispherical surface and
function as a multi-static system [8]. For monostatic data collection, a ridged pyramidal horn antenna [9] has been reported
by the University of Wisconsin, and resistively loaded dipole,
tapered slot, transverse electromagnetic horn, and balanced antipodal Vivaldi antennas have been presented by the University
of Calgary (e.g., [10]). Our most recently developed antennas
are designed to operate in an immersion medium of canola
oil [11]. This immersion medium provides reduced antenna
size and reflections from the skin when compared to free
space, while providing reasonable imaging capabilities with an
acceptable number of measurement locations. We further note
that these antennas are designed to operate in, effectively, the
radiative near-field.
The balanced antipodal Vivaldi antenna (BAVA) is a compact
and versatile design that was introduced in [12]. We have modified the design for our near-field imaging application, as reported in [13]. The BAVA provides a more compact profile and
lower reflections from the feeding structure than the tapered slot
antenna [10]. In this paper, we introduce a significant improvement to our design which consists of a profiled dielectric piece
with higher permittivity that is placed in the antenna aperture.
We refer to this new feature as a “director” as it focuses the energy in the endfire direction in the near-field. We note that there
is a body of work describing the addition of dielectric layers or
radomes to tapered slot antennas (e.g., [14], [15]). These layers
typically improve matching of compact elements and can result
in increased antenna gain. This is a different concept from the
director, in which the dielectric piece is included inside the aperture and effects changes in the radiation behavior without significant changes to the impedance. We also note that inclusion
of materials with different dielectric properties in and around
the aperture of tapered slotline antennas has been previously
reported. For example, dielectric material is removed from the
aperture of the antenna in order to provide a better match to free
space in [16]. In [17], a dielectric rod is placed around the aperture of a Vivaldi antenna, acting as a second traveling wave antenna and resulting in improved gain and phase center stability.
In both of these examples, the permittivity of the inclusion is
lower than that of the antenna substrate. The director that we explore in this paper has a higher permittivity than the antenna substrate, does not improve the impedance matching of the antenna
and is part of the radiation mechanism of the antenna itself.
Hence this novel feature functions in a different manner than

0018-926X/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE

BOURQUI et al.: BAVA WITH DIELECTRIC DIRECTOR FOR NEAR-FIELD MICROWAVE IMAGING

2319

Fig. 2. Geometry and parameters of the BAVA copper pattern. The origin used
to generate the curves is labeled as .
Fig. 1. Exploded view of the BAVA construction.

previously reported work. In the context of microwave imaging
application, a more focused beam illuminates a smaller volume
which leads to an increase in the tumor-to-clutter ratio.
Section II introduces the BAVA design and the modified
version including the dielectric director (BAVA-D). Section III
presents the simulation and measurement methods used in this
paper. Then, Section IV compares the BAVA and BAVA-D, with
emphasis on the correlation between measured and simulated
results and application to a breast model. The findings of the
antenna studies are summarized in Section V.
II. ANTENNA DESIGN
This section presents the BAVA design, then introduces the
director and BAVA-D. Details on implementation of both designs are also provided.
A. BAVA
Our BAVA design follows concepts described in [12]. It
consists of three copper layers; the two external layers are the
ground planes and the central layer is the conductor (Fig. 1).
The copper layers are separated by two dielectric substrates
(supportive substrates) and two additional dielectric layers
are stacked on each side of the antenna (stacking substrates).
This novel feature balances the dielectric loading between the
conductor and ground planes. As a result, the usual beam squint
observed in this type of antenna construction [18] is considerably reduced. Moreover, for this application, the efficiency is
improved since contact between the lossy canola oil and the
external copper layers is avoided. The antenna is fed through
an SMA connector followed by a gradual transition from a
stripline to a tri-strip transmission line (TL). Along the transition, the conductor width increases linearly while the ground
width decreases exponentially to keep constant impedance. The
tri-strip TL extends for a short distance before the grounds and
conductor start to flare in opposite directions with exponential
curvatures to create the antenna aperture.
Fig. 2 presents the geometry and parameters values of the
and
follow the excopper pattern. The curvatures ,
ponential (1):
(1)

TABLE I
CURVATURES PARAMETERS AND RELATION TO THE OTHER ANTENNA
DIMENSIONS DNDICATED IN FIG. 2

The curvatures parameters are listed in Table I. The overall
, including the SMA attachment
antenna size is
elements length but excluding the SMA connector. We note that
Fig. 2 does not include the SMA attachment elements length.
The antenna is constructed using RT/duroid 6002 (Rogers
Corporation, CT, USA) which has a relative permittivity of 2.94.
A photolithography process is used to pattern the copper and the
bonding of the different layers is achieved using a thermoplastic
.
Rogers 3001 bonding film
B. BAVA With Dielectric Director (BAVA-D)
The director consists of a shaped object of higher permittivity,
placed in the aperture (Fig. 3). The director is expected to have
two different effects. First, it should act as a waveguiding structure and direct most of the energy toward the aperture center.
The second effect is related to the phase velocity, which will be
lower in the director structure compared to the rest of the substrate. This produces differences in the propagation velocities in
the director and the copper edges. As waves travel faster along
the edges and the path length is physically longer, the overall
effect is a more planar phase front near the aperture of the antenna (compared to the BAVA).
The shape of the director is designed to avoid reflections from
its extremities, i.e., the start and the end of the aperture, shown
respectively as A and B in Fig. 3 a. The section A approximately
follows the aperture curves while the section B has been limited
to a simple triangle that reasonably avoids reflections from the
aperture. Fig. 3 shows the dimensions. The substrate length is
extended by 4 mm compared to the original design to accommodate the director placement.
The BAVA-D is manufactured similarly to the BAVA. The
opening in the substrate and the director are precisely machined
using a milling machine and a water jet cutter respectively. The
director is simply pressed into the opening and holds without

2320

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 7, JULY 2010

smallest wavelength or smaller where refinements are needed
due to geometrical features of the antenna. Perfectly matched
layers (PML) are used for boundary conditions.
Our microwave imaging system utilizes canola oil as an
ambient immersion medium, so canola’s electrical properties
are assigned to the background of each simulation. From 1 to
14 GHz, its permittivity and conductivity vary from approximately 2.55 to 2.35 and 0.01 to 0.04 S/m, respectively, [19]. For
most simulations, it was found sufficient to consider an average
and the maximum
relative permittivity value of
. However, in some cases, such
conductivity of
as comparing simulations with measurements, a single pole
Debye model may be used to represent the property variations
with frequency

(2)
Fig. 3. BAVA including the higher dielectric permittivity director. (a) Top view
and (b) 3D view with the director shown above its housing. For greater clarity
the dielectric layers are shown as transparent in (a). All dimensions are in mm.

denotes
where , is the complex relative permittivity,
is the static relative
the angular frequency,
permittivity,
is the relative permittivity at infinity,
is the relaxation time and
is the
static conductivity.
The performance of the antennas is evaluated in terms of:
,
, half energy beamwidth (HEBW), half energy beam
and
are simulated using the standard
(HEB) and fidelity.
broadband excitation implemented by SEMCAD X, however
the simulations for the HEBW, HEB and fidelity are computed
using a specific ultrawideband pulse [20] of the form:

(3)
Fig. 4. The constructed BAVA (right) and BAVA-D (left).

any adhesive. The director is made of Eccostock HIK material
(Emerson & Cuming Microwave Product, MA, USA) with relative permittivity of 6. This permittivity has been selected since
it produces the expected effect, however other values may be
utilized. The constructed antennas with and without the director
are shown in Fig. 4.
III. EVALUATION METHODS
In order to test the BAVA and BAVA-D, full wave simulations
are performed. In addition to reflection and transmission, several
near-field parameters are introduced for antenna performance
assessment. The manufactured antennas are immersed in oil,
and measurements are collected in order to compare simulated
and measured data.
A. Simulation
Simulated results are obtained using SEMCAD X (SPEAG,
Zurich, Switzerland), which utilizes the finite-difference
time-domain (FDTD) technique. To feed the antenna, a coaxial
transmission line is connected to the stripline and represents the
SMA-stripline transition used in practice. The coaxial line is
excited using a waveguide source. The mesh size is 1/14 of the

where

is used to adjust the amplitude of the pulse,
and
. This pulse contains energy, above 10% of
its maximum, from 20 MHz to 10 GHz in the frequency spectrum.
The HEBW and HEB are based on the energy radiated by the
antenna. The energy in and around the antenna structure is calculated by summing time samples of the instantaneous Poynting
vector over the duration of the simulation time. We term this
quantity the energy flux density (EFD).
In the near-field, we define the HEBW on a plane orthogonal to the main radiation beam and situated at a given distance
from the antenna aperture. The HEBW describes the region over
which the energy is greater than half of the maximum value on
the selected plane. For the example shown in Fig. 5(a), the antenna is aligned with the x-axis, so the HEBW is evaluated in
the y- and z-directions. The HEB attempts to provide a more
general representation of the radiation beam in the near-field.
Fig. 5(b) shows the HEBW calculated along the x-axis instead
of at a single point as shown by Fig. 5(a). To provide a more
general representation of the radiation beam in the near-field, we
model the conical shape with an equivalent angle in conjunction
with a corresponding beam origin. As shown in Fig. 5(b), the
HEB angle and origin are defined by fitting the half energy contour and maximum energy path recorded on a series of planes
to linear functions. The HEB representation in the near-field

BOURQUI et al.: BAVA WITH DIELECTRIC DIRECTOR FOR NEAR-FIELD MICROWAVE IMAGING

2321

Fig. 6. Measurement setup including the VNA, oil tank, positioning system,
antenna and one of the objects used to record reflections.

Fig. 5. Half energy area on one plane (a) and HEB representation (b).

is powerful since, by including the beam origin information, it
models the radiation behavior as function of the actual antenna
structure and size. This makes radiation pattern comparison between antennas more straightforward and makes prediction of
the radiation coverage of an object placed close to the antenna
possible.
The fidelity measures how faithfully the excitation pulse is
transmitted or received by the antenna and therefore reflects
the distortion due to the frequency band limitation and phase
non-linearity [21]. Only the transmitting fidelity is of interest.
It is calculated using the main polarization component ( component) of the electric field and the first derivative of the excitation pulse is used as a reference signal. The maximum value of
fidelity is one.

Reflections are measured from objects consisting of cubes
and spheres of dimensions varying from 13 mm to 3.2 mm. The
objects are made out of Eccostock HIK and TMM6 (Rogers Corporation) materials with relative permittivities of 10 and 6, respectively. These objects are attached to a Plexiglas rod
and positioned in front of the antenna using a manual linear
stage as shown in Fig. 6. In order to extract the reflections from
the objects, a reference measurement of the Plexiglas rod is subtracted from the total measurement. The resulting signal is reis measured using the
ferred to as the calibrated response.
same setup but with two antennas facing each other and separated by a known distance.
The near-field radiation pattern is measured using a dosimetric assessment system (DASY 4 Professional, SPEAG). The
antenna is placed in the same tank of oil as presented in Fig. 6.
The radiated E-field is measured at 2.45, 4, 5.1, 5.9 GHz. Only
relative radiation intensity is measured since the probes are not
calibrated for canola oil.
IV. RESULTS
The director influence is assessed by comparing the BAVA-D
performance to the original BAVA design with simulated and
measured results. S-parameters, radiation fields, backscatter reflections and ability to sense a tumor in a breast model are presented.
A. S-Parameters

B. Measurement
All of the measurements are obtained with the antennas
immersed in canola oil and data are recorded by an Agilent
8719ES Vector Network Analyzer (VNA) (Agilent, Palo Alto,
CA). The time signals are synthetically created from the frequency domain S parameters. First, a Chirp-Z transform is
used to find the frequency-domain representation of (3) at the
measured frequencies. Next, the measured S-parameters are
multiplied with the frequency-domain version of the excitation.
Finally, the inverse Chirp-Z transform is used to obtain the
time-domain signals [22].

The simulated reflection coefficients
of the original
BAVA and the BAVA-D are shown in Fig. 7. Both antennas operate over a 2.4 to 18 GHz band and no substantial difference
is observed between the two versions besides slightly higher reflections at lower frequencies for the BAVA-D.
of two constructed BAVA-Ds are
In Fig. 8, the measured
compared with the simulated data. The measurements match
the main trends of the simulations. The main source of error
comes from the thermoplastic used to bond the different layers
together, since it does not match the substrate permittivity (
compared to 2.94 for the substrate). However, the measured

2322

Fig. 7. Simulated S

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 7, JULY 2010

for the BAVA and BAVA-D.

Fig. 8. Measured BAVA-Ds S

Fig. 9. Transmission coefficient (S ) obtained with two antennas facing each
other with 100 mm separation (metalization end as reference).

compared to the simulation data.

results remain acceptable since the bandwidth is not significantly altered. Similar agreement is seen with the BAVA [13].
between two antennas
Next, the transmission parameter
assesses the improvements due to the director in the frequency
domain. From a detection perspective, an antenna with higher
will receive more reflected energy from an object placed in
front of the antenna. Fig. 9 presents the simulated and measured
for both antennas facing each other and separated by 100
mm (metalization end as reference). First, it is observed that
magnitude between 2 to around
the director increases the
12 GHz. Similar behavior has been observed at separation distances between 40 to 150 mm and therefore it is concluded
that there is no direct dependence on the separation distance.
Second, it is observed that the measured data does not match
the magnitude of the simulated results for both antennas. This
discrepancy mostly stems from the canola oil. When the same
scenario is reproduced in the air, a good match is found between
simulated and measured results. The reason for the disagreement, when the antennas are immersed in canola oil, is unknown
measurements exand is being investigated. Nevertheless,
hibit the same trends as the simulations and it can be observed

Fig. 10. Simulated total EFD on the Y plane @ y = 0 for the (a) BAVA and
(b) BAVA-D. Data are normalized by the input energy. The EFD at each point is
the sum of the sampled instantaneous Poynting vector over the duration of the
simulation.

that the transmitted power is increased by approximately the
same ratio when the director is present.
B. Radiated Fields
To define the beamwidth, the EFD is computed on Y and
Z planes ranging from the antenna feed point to a distance of
70 mm away from the aperture. These data are shown for both
antennas in Fig. 10 for the Y plane. The endfire radiation behavior is evident, while it can be noticed that the director significantly increases the near-field directivity of the BAVA. A
slight increase in the back radiation is noticed when the director
is present, however the front to back ratio is still 35% higher
compared with the original BAVA. When the radiation behavior
is analyzed in the frequency domain, it is observed that the director effect increases with frequency. This phenomenon is confirmed by the transmission coefficient in Fig. 9 while Fig. 11

BOURQUI et al.: BAVA WITH DIELECTRIC DIRECTOR FOR NEAR-FIELD MICROWAVE IMAGING

2323

TABLE II
SIMULATED BEAMWIDTH RESULTS FOR THE BAVA AND BAVA-D

Fig. 11. Simulated radiated E-field RMS modulus at 3, 6, 9 and 12 GHz on
the Y plane @ y = 0 for the BAVA and BAVA-D. The fields are normalized in
proportion to the energy accepted by each antenna at each frequency.

Fig. 12. Simulated HEB on the Z plane for the (a) BAVA and (b) BAVA-D.
Dotted lines represent the half energy limits and the maximum energy path with
the beam origin indicated by the circle.

illustrates this effect at selected frequencies. The HEB view in
the Z plane (Fig. 12) shows that, when the director is present,
the pulse energy stays concentrated inside the antenna structure
while it starts to expand outside the substrate boundary around
15 mm before the end of the antenna for the original design.
This illustrates the waveguide effect produced by the director.
A quantitative comparison of the beamwidth is contained in
Table II. As expected the effect of the director on the beamwidth
is an overall narrowing on both axes as demonstrated by the
HEBW values at 20 and 50 mm. It is observed that the director
improvement to beamwidths in the Y and Z planes is not necessarily due to a smaller HEB angle as a shift of the beam origin towards the antenna aperture occurs. For example the HEB angle
on the Y plane actually increases from 32 to 34 however the

HEBW measured at 20 and 50 mm are smaller with the director
present. This occurs because the energy starts to expand further along the antenna in the X direction which is clearly exto
pressed by the shift of the beam origin from
with the director (Table II). On the Z plane, the director actually reduces the HEB angle from 60 to 51 while the
to
.
beam origin is also moved from
Therefore the HEBW on the Z plane is significantly reduced as
indicated in Table II. For the BAVA and BAVA-D, beam deviations of 3 and 4 , respectively, appear on the Y plane while no
deviation is observed on the Z plane. Thus the director slightly
increases the beam deviation on the Y plane.
Next, the measured radiation pattern in the near-field is compared with simulation. Very good agreement is found for both
antennas at all tested frequencies. A typical result is shown in
Fig. 13 for the BAVA-D at 5.1 GHz.
The simulated fidelity is very close to 1 for both antennas,
with values above 0.9 at the aperture and above 0.96 from 20 mm
away, as shown by Fig. 14. For the original BAVA, the fidelity
logically increases with the distance from the aperture, however
the version with the director has a higher fidelity closer to the
antenna which slightly decreases further away. This behavior is
a direct effect of the director which evenly concentrates the radiated energy, across the frequency band, closer to the antenna
aperture. The fidelity of the radiated pulse has not been measured because of equipment limitations. However the following
section shows correlation between measured and simulated reflections from different objects, supporting the fidelity results.
C. Backscatter Reflections
Reflections from different objects placed 40 mm in front of
the antenna aperture are measured and compared with simulated
data. The dispersive behavior of the canola oil is included in simulations to closely reproduce the measurement environment. To
calibrate the simulated data, the response computed without an
object is subtracted from the total response received with the
object present. To facilitate comparison between measured and
simulated data, each signal is normalized to its maximum absolute value. Additionally the simulated signal is slightly shifted
to be aligned with the measured data. Representative instances
of the reflected signals are shown in Fig. 15 which illustrates
cube made of Eccosthe reflections from a
material
. The shapes of measured
tock
backscatter signals are consistent with their simulated counterparts for both antennas. The good correlation between measured

2324

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 7, JULY 2010

Fig. 15. Calibrated Backscatter time domain signature produced by a 6 2 6 2
6 mm cube made of Eccostock HIK = 10 material ( = 10). (a) Measured
vs simulated time signature using the BAVA-D. (b) Measured reflected signal
using the BAVA and BAVA-D.

to a large one. The measurements (Fig. 15(b)) confirm the increase in reflected energy observed with the director and its dependence on the object size. The BAVA-D tends to have slightly
stronger late time ringing compared to the BAVA. This behavior
is not surprising and improvement in this ringing may be expected with a modified director shape.
Fig. 13. Simulated and measured radiation pattern at 5.1 GHz for the BAVA-D.

Fig. 14. Simulated fidelity along an X-directed line away from the antenna
aperture. (x = 0 at the aperture as in Fig. 13).

and simulated signatures supports the simulated fidelity results
presented earlier.
Next, the intensity of the backscatter signal is explored. The
simulated results obtained for the different objects demonstrate
an increase in reflected intensity ranging from 2.6 to 3.6 when
the director is used. It is also observed that smaller objects tend
to increase this ratio, which makes sense since a narrower beam
would increase the illumination of a small surface compared

D. Tumor Detection in Realistic Breast Model
Since the ultimate purpose of these antennas is to sense breast
tumors, simulations have been performed to assess the improvement induced by the director for this particular application. For
this task, a breast model of realistic shape, derived from an
MRI scan, is imported into SEMCAD X. The simulation model
is presented in Fig. 16. A 40 mm thick object, that replicates
the chest wall, is added on the upper part of the breast model.
The breast interior is homogeneous and is simulated as adipose
tissue. A 6 mm tumor is placed at a distance of 30 mm from the
skin. The electric properties of breast tissues at microwave frequencies are modeled in SEMCAD X using single pole Debye
models. The Debye parameters presented in [23] are used for
the adipose tissue and tumor while the data measured in [24] are
used to simulate dry skin. The chest wall, with a relative permittivity of 50 and electrical conductivity of 4 S/m, is not modeled
as a dispersive material. The parameters for the different Debye
models can be found in Table III.
The antenna is aligned with the tumor and placed approximately 20 mm from the breast surface. The antenna scans the
model in a circular pattern with 18 degree increments. The zero
degree (reference) location is defined in Fig. 17. For each position, simulations are performed with and without the tumor
present, such that the tumor reflections can be extracted from
the overall signal by a simple subtraction. The energy contained
in the tumor reflection at each antenna position is calculated
and normalized to the maximum reflected energy sensed by the
BAVA.
Fig. 17 presents the EFD in the coronal plane of the breast
models with the antennas at the reference location. It is observed

BOURQUI et al.: BAVA WITH DIELECTRIC DIRECTOR FOR NEAR-FIELD MICROWAVE IMAGING

Fig. 16. The breast model including the tumor and the antenna. The skin and
the interior of the breast are transparent to show the tumor.

TABLE III
DEBYE PARAMETERS USED TO MODEL THE
PROPERTIES OF THE DIFFERENT BREAST TISSUES

2325

Fig. 18. Energy reflected by the tumor sensed with the BAVA and BAVA-D in
function of azimuth position. The values are normalized to the maximum energy
sensed by the BAVA. The delta values correspond to the difference between the
BAVA-D and BAVA energies.

compensated for in practical terms by the increased tumor response.
V. CONCLUSION

Fig. 17. Total EFD on the Y plane, radiated by (a) the BAVA and (b) BAVA-D
inside the breast. The circle represents the tumor location. Data are normalized
by the input energy.

In this paper the near-field directivity of a BAVA is improved
by the inclusion of higher permittivity and specially shaped material in the aperture. This novel feature is called the director.
The BAVA-D produces a narrower beamwidth and generally
below
between 2.4
higher fidelity while keeping
to 18 GHz (SMA connector limit).
The effect of this narrower beamwidth is also noticed in
since the transmitted energy between two antennas is significantly higher when the director is present. Additionally, it is
demonstrated that the BAVA-D increases the backscatter energy
from an object placed in front of the antenna, such as a tumor
contained in a breast. From a detection point of view, this is an
advantage. Only basic explanations about the physical effect of
the director are given in this paper. A deeper analysis of the director effect and the influence of its permittivity, shape and size
is ongoing.
Finally, we note that the director is expected to produce similar effect when applied to any type of aperture-based traveling
wave antenna.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT

that more energy penetrates into the breast when the director is
used. Fig. 18 demonstrates that this increase is also noted as the
antenna is scanned around the breast. Specifically the BAVA-D
magnifies the tumor reflection by 3 to 4 dB for all positions. For
this specific scenario, the reduced beamwidth does not reduce
the number of locations at which the tumor is sensed. Practically, the number of locations at which the tumor response is
received relates to the breast size, tumor location and glandular
tissue distribution. The decrease in beamwidth may result in a
small increase in the number of scan locations; however this is

The authors would like to acknowledge the technical support
of F. Hickli, B. Isenor, C. Stern, R. Scorey, T. Williams and J.
Shelley, all of the University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Semenov, V. Posukh, A. Bulyshev, and T. Williams, “Microwave tomographic imaging of the heart in intact swine,” J. Electromagn. Waves
Applicat., vol. 20, no. 7, pp. 873–890, 2006.
[2] S. Semenov et al., “Microwave tomography for functional imaging of
extremity soft tissues: Feasibility assessment,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol.
52, no. 18, pp. 5705–5719, 2007.

2326

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 7, JULY 2010

[3] T. Rubaek, P. Meincke, and O. Kim, “Three-dimensional microwave
imaging for breast-cancer detection using the log-phase formulation,”
in Proc. IEEE Antennas Propag. Soc. Int. Symp., 2007, pp. 2184–2187.
[4] M. L. Lazebnik et al., “A large-scale study of the ultrawideband microwave dielectric properties of normal breast tissue obtained from reduction surgeries,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 52, no. 10, pp. 2637–2656,
May 2007.
[5] M. L. Lazebnik et al., “A large-scale study of the ultrawideband microwave dielectric properties of normal, benign and malignant breast
tissues obtained from cancer surgeries,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 52, no.
20, pp. 6093–6115, Oct. 2007.
[6] R. Nilavalan, I. Craddock, J. Leendertz, A. Preece, and R. Benjamin,
“Wideband microstrip patch antenna design for breast cancer tumour
detection,” IET Microwaves Antennas Propag., vol. 1, pp. 277–281,
2007.
[7] D. R. Gibbins, M. Klemm, I. Craddock, G. Hilton, and D. Paul, “The
design of a wide slot antenna for the transmission of UWB signals into
the human body using FDTD simulation,” in Proc. 2nd Eur. Conf. Antennas Propag., Edinburgh, U.K., Nov. 11–16, 2007, vol. 1, 5 pages.
[8] I. Craddock, M. Klemm, J. Leendertz, A. Preece, and R. Benjamin, “An
improved hemispherical antenna array design for breast imaging,” in
Proc. 2nd Eur. Conf. Antennas Propag., Edinburgh, U.K., Nov. 11–16,
2007, 5 pages.
[9] X. Li, S. Hagness, M. Choi, and D. van der Weide, “Numerical and
experimental investigation of an ultrawideband ridged pyramidal horn
antenna with curved launching plane for pulse radiation,” IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 2, pp. 259–262, 2003.
[10] J. Bourqui, M. A. Campbell, J. Sill, M. Shenouda, and E. C. Fear,
“Investigation of antenna performance for ultra-wideband microwave
breast imaging,” in Proc. IEEE Radio Wireless Symp., San Diego, CA,
2009, pp. 522–525.
[11] J. Sill and E. Fear, “Tissue sensing adaptive radar for breast cancer
detection: Study of immersion liquids,” Electron. Lett., vol. 41, no. 3,
pp. 113–115, 2005.
[12] J. Langley, P. Hall, and P. Newham, “Novel ultrawide-bandwidth Vivaldi antenna with low crosspolarisation,” Electron. Lett., vol. 29, no.
23, pp. 2004–2005, 1993.
[13] J. Bourqui, M. Okoniewski, and E. C. Fear, “Balanced antipodal Vivaldi antenna for breast cancer detection,” in Proc. 2nd Eur. Conf. Antennas Propag., Edinburgh, U.K., Nov. 11–16, 2007, 5 pages.
[14] R. Simons and R. Lee, “Impedance matching of tapered slot antenna
using a dielectric transformer,” Electron. Lett., vol. 34, no. 24, pp.
2287–2289, 1998.
[15] D. Schaubert, S. Kasturi, A. Boryssenko, and W. Elsallal, “Vivaldi antenna arrays for wide bandwidth and electronic scanning,” in Proc. 2nd
Eur. Conf. Antennas Propag., Edinburgh, U.K., Nov. 11–16, 2007, 6
pages.
[16] N. Schuneman, J. Irion, and R. Hodges, “Decade bandwidth tapered
notch antenna array element,” in Proc. Antenna Applicat. Symp., 2001,
pp. 280–294.
[17] A. Elsherbini, C. Zhang, S. Lin, M. Kuhn, A. Kamel, A. Fathy, and H.
Elhennawy, “Uwb antipodal Vivaldi antennas with protruded dielectric rods for higher gain, symmetric patterns and minimal phase center
variations,” in Proc. IEEE Antennas Propag. Soc. Int. Symp., 2007, pp.
1973–1976.
[18] J. Langley, P. Hall, and P. Newham, “Balanced antipodal Vivaldi antenna for wide bandwidth phased arrays,” Proc. Inst. Elect. Eng. Microwaves Antennas Propagat., vol. 143, no. 2, pp. 97–102, 1996.
[19] J. M. Sill, “Second generation experimental system for tissue sensing
adaptive radar,” Master’s thesis, Dept. Elect. Comput. Eng., Schulich
School of Engineering, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada,
2005.

[20] E. Fear, X. Li, S. Hagness, and M. Stuchly, “Confocal microwave
imaging for breast cancer detection: Localization of tumors in three
dimensions,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 49, pp. 812–822, 2002.
[21] T. Montoya, T. Montoya, and G. Smith, “A study of pulse radiation
from several broad-band loaded monopoles,” IEEE Trans. Antennas
Propag., vol. 44, no. 8, pp. 1172–1182, 1996.
[22] B. Ulriksson, “Conversion of frequency-domain data to the time domain,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 74, pp. 74–77, Jan. 1986.
[23] M. Lazebnik, M. Okoniewski, J. Booske, and S. Hagness, “Highly accurate Debye models for normal and malignant breast tissue dielectric
properties at microwave frequencies,” IEEE Microw. Wireless Compon.
Lett., vol. 17, no. 12, pp. 822–824, 2007.
[24] D. W. Winters, E. J. Bond, B. D. Van Veen, and S. C. Hagness, “Estimation of the frequency-dependent average dielectric properties of breast
tissue using a time-domain inverse scattering technique,” IEEE Trans.
Antennas Propag., vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 3517–3528, 2006.

Jeremie Bourqui was born in Switzerland in 1982.
He received the Ing. HES (B.Sc.) degree in electrical
engineering from the University of Applied Sciences,
Fribourg, Switzerland, in 2004 and the M.Sc. degree
from the University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada,
in 2008.
He is currently a Research Engineer at the University of Calgary. His work involves the design, implementation and testing of a microwave breast imaging
system. This includes UWB sensors, RF measurement and antenna positioning systems.

Michal Okoniewski (F’09) is a Professor in the
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, where
he holds the Libin/Ingenuity Chair in biomedical-engineering and Canada Research Chair in Applied
Electromagnetics. His interests range from computational electrodynamics, to tunable reflectarrays,
RF MEMS and RF micro-machined devices, as well
as hardware acceleration of computational methods.
He is also involved in bio-electromagnetics, where
he works on tissue spectroscopy and micro-imaging.
In 2004 he cofounded Acceleware Corp.

Elise C. Fear (S’98–M’02) received the Ph.D. degree
in electrical engineering from the University of Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada, in 2001.
She was an NSERC (Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada) Postdoctoral
Fellow in electrical engineering at the University
of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada from 2001 to
2002, and is currently an Associate Professor in
the same department. Her research interests include
microwave breast cancer detection.
Dr. Fear is currently serving as an Associate Editor
for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, and was awarded
the 2007 Outstanding Paper Award from the same journal.

