2426

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 7, JULY 2010

Magnetic Induction Communications for Wireless
Underground Sensor Networks
Zhi Sun, Student Member, IEEE, and Ian F. Akyildiz, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—The main difference between the wireless underground sensor networks (WUSNs) and the terrestrial wireless
sensor networks is the signal propagation medium. The underground is a challenging environment for wireless communications
since the propagation medium is no longer air but soil, rock and
water. The well established wireless signal propagation techniques using electromagnetic (EM) waves do not work well in
this environment due to three problems: high path loss, dynamic
channel condition and large antenna size. New techniques using
magnetic induction (MI) create constant channel condition and
can accomplish the communication with small size coils. In this
paper, detailed analysis on the path loss and the bandwidth of the
MI system in underground soil medium is provided. Based on the
channel analysis, the MI waveguide technique for communication
is developed in order to reduce the high path loss of the traditional
EM wave system and the ordinary MI system. The performance of
the EM wave system, the ordinary MI system and our improved
MI waveguide system are quantitatively compared. The results
reveal that the transmission range of the MI waveguide system is
dramatically increased.
Index Terms—Channel modeling, magnetic induction (MI),
MI waveguide technique, underground communication, wireless
sensor networks.

I. INTRODUCTION

W

IRELESS underground sensor networks (WUSNs) enable a wide variety of novel applications [1], [2], including soil condition monitoring, earthquake and landslide prediction, underground infrastructure monitoring, sports-field turf
management, landscape management, border patrol and security, and etc. However, underground is a challenging environment for wireless communication [3]. The propagation medium
is no longer air but soil, rock and water, where the well established wireless propagation techniques for terrestrial wireless
sensor networks do not work well.
Traditional wireless communication techniques using electromagnetic (EM) waves encounter three major problems in
underground environments: the high path loss, the dynamic
channel condition and the large antenna size [3]. In particular,
first, EM waves experience high levels of attenuation due to absorption by soil, rock, and water in the underground. Since the
WUSN devices have very limited radio power due to the energy

Manuscript received May 20, 2009; revised January 06, 2010; accepted January 28, 2010. Date of publication April 22, 2010; date of current version July
08, 2010. This work was supported by the US National Science Foundation
(NSF) under Grant CCF-0728889.
The authors are with the Broadband Wireless Networking Laboratory, School
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332 USA (e-mail: zsun@ece.gatech.edu; ian@ece.gatech.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TAP.2010.2048858

constraint, the transmission range between two sensor nodes
using EM waves is very small (no more than 4 m). Second,
the path loss is highly dependent on numerous soil properties
such as water content, soil makeup (sand, silt, or clay) and
density, and can change dramatically with time (e.g., increased
soil water content after a rainfall) and location (soil properties
change dramatically over short distances). Consequently, the
bit error rate (BER) of the communication system also varies
dramatically in different times or positions. The unreliable
channel brings design challenges for the sensor devices and
networks to achieve both satisfying connectivity and energy efficiency. Third, large size antenna is necessary for the efficient
propagation of EM waves. Path loss can be reduced if lower
operating frequencies are used. The lower the frequency is, the
larger the antenna must be to efficiently transmit and receive
EM waves [4], which obvious conflicts with the necessity that
underground sensors remain small.
If the sensors of WUSNs are buried in the shallow depth,
sensor can communicate with the aboveground data sinks directly using EM waves. This is because the underground path
is short in this case. Hence the impacts of the additional path
loss and the dynamic channel caused by the soil medium are
much smaller. However, many WUSN applications, such as underground structure monitoring, require the sensors buried deep
underground, where only underground-to-underground channel
is available.
Magnetic induction (MI) is a promising alternative physical
layer technique for WUSNs in deep burial depth. It can address
the problems on the dynamic channel condition and the large
antenna size of the EM waves techniques. Specifically, the underground medium such as soil and water cause little variation in
the attenuation rate of magnetic fields from that of air, since the
magnetic permeabilities of each of these materials are similar
[2], [5], [6]. This fact guarantees that the MI channel conditions
remain constant for a certain path in different times. Moreover,
in the MI communication, the transmission and reception are
accomplished with the use of a small size coil of wire. In addition, since the radiation resistance of coil is much smaller than
electric dipole, very small portion of energy is radiated to the
far field by the coil. Hence, the multi-path fading is not an issue
for MI communication. However, MI is generally unfavorable
for terrestrial wireless communication. As the transmission distance increases, magnetic field strength falls off much faster
than the EM waves
in terrestrial environments. In
underground environments, although it is known that the soil
absorption causes high signal attenuation in the EM wave systems but does not affect the MI systems, it is not clear whether
the total path loss of the MI system is lower than the EM wave

0018-926X/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE

SUN AND AKYILDIZ: MAGNETIC INDUCTION COMMUNICATIONS FOR WUSNs

2427

system or not. Additionally, since the MI communication involves reactance coils as antenna, the system bandwidth needs
to be analyzed.
In this paper, we first provide a detailed analysis on the path
loss and the bandwidth of the MI communication channel in
underground environments. Then based on the analysis, we develop the MI waveguide technique for WUSNs, which can significantly reduce the path loss, enlarge the transmission range
and achieve practical bandwidth for MI communication in underground environments. In particular, the MI transmitter and
receiver are modeled as the primary coil and secondary coil of
a transformer. Multiple factors are considered in the analysis,
including the soil properties, coil size, the number of turns in
the coil loop, coil resistance, operating frequency. The analysis
shows that the ordinary MI systems have larger transmission
range but lower bandwidth than the EM wave systems. However, neither the ordinary MI system nor the EM wave system
is able to provide enough communication range for practical
WUSNs applications. Motivated by this fact, we develop the MI
waveguide technique [7] to enlarge the communication range.
In this case, some small coils are deployed between the transmitter and the receiver as relay points, which form a discontinuous waveguide.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section II, the related work is introduced. Then in Section III,
the path loss and the bandwidth of the underground MI communication system is analyzed. In Section IV, the MI waveguide
technique for underground wireless communication is developed. Finally, the paper is concluded in Section V.

munication applications (such as the link between a cell phone
or an MP3 player and a headset), the rapid fall off of the MI
signal strength is exploited to provide each user with his own
private bubble, without having to worry about mutual interference among multiple users, and permitting bandwidth reuse.
However, in the underground communication applications, the
high path loss is obviously not an advantage.
In [5], the MI is first introduced to the field of wireless underground communication. It shows that the MI transmission
is not affected by soil type, composition, compaction, or moisture content, and requires less power and lower operating frequencies than RF transmission. However, the theoretical/experimental results show that the communication range is no more
than 30 inches (0.76 m). Moreover, the bandwidth of the MI
system is not considered in the paper.
Besides underground, the MI communication can also be
used in other RF-impenetrable environments, such as human
body. In [12], a body network is built to collect data from,
and transport information to, implanted miniature devices at
multiple sites within the human body. The MI technique is
employed to link information between a pair of implants, and
to provide electric power to these implants. In [13], a new
magnetic material is analyzed to guide magnetic information to
the receiver coil, permitting a clear image deep within the body.
In [7], [14], [15], the MI waveguide is investigated. It is shown
that an array of loops can act as a waveguide, propagating a new
form of wave known as a MI wave. Up to now, the MI waveguide has been designed and used as artificial delay lines and filters, dielectric mirrors, distributed Bragg reflectors, slow-wave
structures in microwave tubes, coupled cavities in accelerators,
modulators, etc. However, there is no attempt to utilize the MI
waveguide in the wireless communication field. The theoretical
analysis of the MI waveguide in [14] is validated by experiments
in [16]. Note that we adopt similar theoretical analysis method
as [14] in this paper.
Currently, there is no solution to address the low communication range problem of both the EM wave technique and the
MI technique in underground environments. Also no theoretical analysis on underground MI communications is provided.
In this paper, we provide a detailed analysis on the path loss
and bandwidth of the underground MI communications. Based
on the analysis, we develop the MI waveguide communication
technique to enlarge the transmission range of the MI systems
in underground environments.

II. RELATED WORK
The propagation characteristics of EM waves in underground
environments (soil, water and rock) have been presented in [3].
The analysis shows that the path loss is much higher than the
terrestrial case due to the material absorption. The communication success significantly depends on the composition of the
soil and the operating frequency. Since lower operating frequency achieves lower path loss but requires larger antenna size,
a middle course solution is proposed, where the 0.3 m long antenna is used to transmit and receive signals at 300 MHz. The
transmission range is around 4 m, which is still too short for efficient deployment of WUSNs. The theoretical analysis of [3]
has been validated by the testbed developed in [8].
Recently, the magnetic induction has been introduced as
a new physical layer technique for wireless communication.
However it suffers from the high path loss and low bandwidth
problems. In [6], MI communication is employed in the mine
warfare (MIW) operations to provide a more reliable wireless
command, control and navigation channel. The EM channel is
qualitatively analyzed and the low data rates of 100 to 300 bit/s
are achieved in various MI communication experiments carried
out in coastal areas. The authors notice that the high path loss
limits the transmission range. They suggest to place more
MI transceivers to mitigate the high path loss, which is not
feasible for underground wireless networks due to cost/energy
constraint and deployment difficulty.
In [9]–[11], the MI is utilized as an alternative personal communication technique to the Bluetooth. In the near-field com-

III. MI CHANNEL CHARACTERISTICS
A. System Modeling
In MI communications, the transmission and reception are
accomplished with the use of a coil of wire, as shown in the first
are the radii of the transmission
row in Fig. 1, where and
coil and receiving coil, respectively; is the distance between
the transmitter and the receiver.
Suppose the signal in the transmitter coil is a sinusoidal cur, where is the angle frequency of the
rent, i.e.,
and is the system operating fretransmitting signal.
quency. This current can induce another sinusoidal current in the
receiver then accomplish the communication. The interaction

2428

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 7, JULY 2010

According to the transmission line theory, the reflections take
place unless the line is terminated by its matched impedance.
In the equivalent circuit described in Fig. 1, to maximize the
received power, the load impedance is designed to be equal to
the complex conjugate of the output impedance of the secondary
loop, i.e.,
(3)
The following task is to find the analytical expression for the
resistance, self and mutual induction of the transmitter and receiver coils. The resistance is determined by the material, the
size and the number of turns of the coil

(4)

Fig. 1. MI communication channel model.

between the two coupled coils is represented by the mutual induction. Therefore, the MI transmitter and receiver can be modeled as the primary coil and the secondary coil of a transformer,
is
respectively, as shown in the second row in Fig. 1, where
the mutual induction of the transmitter coil and receiver coil;
is the voltage of the transmitter’s battery;
and
are the
and
are the resistances of the coil;
is
self inductions;
the load impedance of the receiver. We use its equivalent circuit
to analyze the transformer, as shown in the third row in Fig. 1,
where

where,
and
are the number of turns of the transmitter coil
is the resistance of a unit
and receiving coil, respectively;
length of the loop. According to American Wire Gauge (AWG)
can be a value from
to 3
with
standard,
different wire diameter [17].
Since the coil is modeled as a magnetic dipole, the self induction and mutual induction can be deduced by the magnetic
potential of the magnetic dipole, which is provided in polar
coordinate system by [18]
(5)
where is the permeability of the transmission medium; is
the wavelength of the signal. By using Stokes’ theorem [18],
the mutual induction of the two coils can be calculated
(6)
The self induction can be derived in the same way

(7)
(1)
and
are the self impedances of the transmitter coil
where
is the influence of the reand the receiver coil, respectively;
ceiver on the transmitter while
is the influence of the transis the induced voltage on the receiver
mitter on the receiver;
coil.
In the equivalent circuit, the transmitting power is equal to
the power consumed in the primary loop. The receiving power is
equal to the power consumed in the load impedance . Both received power and transmitting power are functions of the transmission range

(2)

Consequently, by substituting (1), (3), (4), (6) and (7) into (2),
the received power and the transmitting power can be calculated.
It should be noted that, the underground transmission medium
contains different type of soil, water, rocks and etc. It is necessary to analyze the differences between the permeabilities of
these materials. According to [19], the substances of the underground medium can be categorized into four main groups including organic materials, inorganic materials, air, and water,
where organic materials come from plants and animals; inorganic materials include sand, silt and clay. The relative permeabilities of the plants, animals, air and water are very close to
1. If the sand, silt, and clay do not consist of magnetite, their
permeabilities are also close to 1. An example is that the average value for sedimentary rocks is given in [19] as 1.0009.
Since most soil in the nature does not contain magnetite, we
can assume that the permeability of the underground transmission medium is a constant based on the above discussion.

SUN AND AKYILDIZ: MAGNETIC INDUCTION COMMUNICATIONS FOR WUSNs

2429

B. Path Loss
For wireless communication using EM waves, the Friis transmission equation [20] gives the power received by one antenna,
given another antenna some distance away transmitting a known
amount of power. Since the radiation power is the major consumption of the EM wave transmitter, the transmitting power
of the EM wave system is a constant and not influenced by the
is a function of
position of the receiver, i.e. for EM waves,
distance while
is a constant. Hence the path loss is measured by the ratio of the received power to the radiation power.
of the EM wave propagation in soil medium
The path loss
is given by [3]
Fig. 2. Path loss of the EM wave system and the MI system with different soil
water content.

(8)
where the transmission distance is given in meters; the attenuation constant is in 1/m and the phase shifting constant is in
radian/m. The values of and depend on the dielectric properties of soil, and is derived in [3, (8)–(14)] using the Peplinski
principle [21]. Note that the reflection from the air-ground interface is neglected since the burial depth is large, which has been
explained in [3].
Unlike the EM wave transmitter, the radiation power of the
MI communication system can be neglected since the radiation resistance is very small. Meanwhile, the induced power
consumed at the MI receiver is the major power consumption
since the MI communication is achieved by coupling in the
non-propagating near-field. The transmitting power of the MI
system consists of the induced power consumed at the MI receiver and the power consumed in the coil resistance. If the
coil resistance is small, the ratio of the received power to the
transmitting power will be close to 1 since the receiving power
and transmission power decrease simultaneously as the transmission distance increases. The advantage of this feature is that
the limited transmission power won’t be wasted on radiation
to the surrounding space. Most power is transmitted to the receiver, which is favorable to the energy constrained WUSNs.
However, as the transmission distance increases, less and less
power is transmitted to the receiver. Hence there still exists a so
called Path loss. It should be noted that the power is not really
lost but in fact not transmitted. To fairly compare the performance of the EM wave system and MI system, the path loss
of the MI system with transmission distance is defined as
, where
is the received
power at the receiver that is meters away from the transmitter;
is the reference transmitting power when the transmission distance is a very small value . We can consider that
if is small enough. In case of low coil resis, the path loss
tances and high operating frequency
of the MI communication system can be simplified as

(9)

We compare (8) with (9) to analyze the path loss of MI and
EM wave systems in underground environments. In (8), there
are two terms in the path loss that are determined by the disis due to the space spread and
tance , where the term
the term
is due to the material absorption. The transmission medium has significant influence in the path loss since
it determines the propagation constants and . In (9), only
is determined by the distance , which is due
one term
to the spread of the magnetic field. The transmission medium
has no obvious influence on the MI path loss since we assume
that the permeability of the medium is a constant as discussed in
in MI case
the beginning. Although the path loss term
is much higher than the term
in EM waves case, it is
not clear whether the total path loss of MI system is larger than
that of the EM wave system or not, since the material absorpin EM wave path loss varies a lot in different
tion term
transmission medium.
C. Numerical Analysis
1) Path Loss: The path losses of the MI system and the EM
wave system shown in (8) and (9) are evaluated using MATLAB.
The results are shown in Fig. 2. According to [3], the propagation of the EM waves in soil medium is severely affected
by the soil properties, especially, the volumetric water content
(VWC) of soil. Hence in the evaluations, we set the VWC of
the soil medium as 1%, 5% and 25% The permittivity and conductivity of soil medium is calculated by the Peplinski principle
[3, (8)–(12)], which are functions of VWC and soil composition. In our simulations, besides VWC, the soil composition is
set as follows, the sand particle percent is 50%, the clay percent
, and the solid soil
is 15%, the bulk density is 1.5
particle density is 2.66
, which are typical values in
nature. As discussed in the beginning, the permeability of the
underground transmission medium is a constant and is the same
. Other simulation paas that in the air, which is
rameters are set as follows: for EM wave system, the operating
frequency is set to 300 MHz. The reason for this choice is as follows: on the one hand, lower frequency bands are necessary for
acceptable path loss. On the other hand, decreasing operating
frequency below 300 MHz increases the antenna size, which

2430

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 7, JULY 2010

Fig. 3. Bit error rate of the EM wave system and the MI system with different
soil water content and noise level.
Fig. 4. Frequency response of the MI system with different transmission range.

can also prevent practical implementation of WUSNs. For MI
system, the transmitter and the receiver coil have the same radius of 0.15 m and the number of turns is 5. The coil is made of
copper wire with a 1.45 mm diameter. Hence the resistance of
can be looked up in AWG standard [17] as 0.01
unit length
. The operating frequency is set to 10 MHz. This low operating frequency together with the small number of turns can effectively mitigate the influence of the parasitic capacitance [22].
In Fig. 2, the path losses of the MI system and EM wave
system are shown in dB versus the transmission distance with
different soil VWC. As expected, the path loss of the MI system
is not affected by the environment since the permeability remains the same. On the other hand, the path loss of the EM wave
system dramatically increases as the VWC increases. When the
, the path loss of the EM waves
soil is very dry
is smaller than that of the MI system. When the soil is very wet
, the path loss of the EM waves is significant
, the path
larger than that of the MI system. When
losses of these two systems are similar. It can be seen that the
path loss of the MI system is a lg function of the distance
while the path loss of the EM wave system is an approximately
linear function of the distance . This is because that the path
loss caused by material absorption is the major part in the EM
, in the near region bewaves’ propagation. When
tween 0.5 m and 3 m, the EM wave system has smaller path
, the MI system has
loss; in the relatively far region
smaller path loss than the EM wave system. Even in the very dry
, the MI system can achieve smaller
soil medium
path loss than the EM wave system after a sufficient long transmission distance.
2) Bit Error Rate: Furthermore, we investigate the bit error
rate (BER) characteristics of the two propagation techniques.
The results are shown in Fig. 3. The BER characteristic depends
mainly on three factors: 1). the path loss, 2). the noise level and
3). the modulation scheme used by the system. The path loss of
the MI system and the EM wave system has been given in (8)
and (9). The noise power in soil is measured using the BVS YellowJacket wireless spectrum analyzer [23] in [3]. The average
is found to be 103 dBm. Besides the experiment
noise level
measurement, we also assume a high noise scenario where the
is set to be 83 dBm. Then the signal to
average noise level

,
noise ratio (SNR) can be calculated by
is the transmitting power and is the path loss given
where
as 10 dBm in the simulation. Conin (8) and (9). We set
sidering the modulation scheme as the simple but widely used
, the BER can be derived as a function of SNR:
, where
is the error function [24].
In Fig. 3, the BERs of the MI system and EM wave system
are shown as a function of the transmission distance with different soil VWC. In low noise scenario, the transmission range
of the MI system is larger than the EM wave system no matter
what VWC is, which can be explained by the following reasons: 1) path loss below 100 dB cannot influence the BER performance when the noise is low. 2) The MI system has higher
path loss than the EM wave system at the near region where
the path losses of both systems are below 100 dB; while in the
far region where the path losses are higher than 100 dB, the MI
system has lower path loss. 3) It is the path loss in the far region that determines the transmission range. In the high noise
scenario, the transmission range of MI system is between the
range of EM wave system in dry soil and the system in wet soil,
since this time the path loss above 80 dB can influence the BER
performance.
3) Bandwidth: It should be noted that, the path loss of the
MI system derived above is based on the assumption that the
load impedance is designed to be equal to the complex conjugate of the output impedance of the secondary loop. However,
since the output impedance of the secondary loop consists of not
only resistance but also reactance, only one central frequency
can realize this load matching. Any deviation from the central
frequency will cause the power reflections and increase the path
loss. Hence it is necessary to analyze the bandwidth of the MI
system. In Fig. 4, the frequency response of the MI system described above is shown with different transmission distance. It
indicates that the 3-dB bandwidth of the MI system is around
2 KHz when the operating frequency is 10 MHz. The bandwidth is not affected by the transmission distance. Although the
2 KHz bandwidth is much smaller than the EM wave system,
it should be enough for the WUSNs considering that the underground sensing and monitoring applications do not require very
high data rate [2].

SUN AND AKYILDIZ: MAGNETIC INDUCTION COMMUNICATIONS FOR WUSNs

2431

how close the coils are to each other. In underground communication, we set the distance between two relay coils to 5 m,
which is larger than the maximum communication range of the
EM wave system. Hence the MI waveguide system do not cost
more on deploying the underground device than the traditional
EM wave system. A lot of money can be saved by replacing
the expensive relay sensor devices using EM waves by the relay
coils that have very low cost. In the later part of this section,
we vary the relay distance of the MI waveguide to analyze the
influence. We assume that the radius of the relay coil is around
0.15 m. Comparing to the coil radius, the relay distance is large
enough to validate the fact that the coils are sufficiently far from
each other and only interact with the nearest neighbors. Hence,
only the mutual induction between the adjacent coils needs to
be taken into account in this paper.
A. System Modeling

Fig. 5. MI waveguide communication channel model.

To sum up, the MI system provides larger transmission range
(around 10 m) than that of the EM wave system (around 4 m).
The MI system also has the advantage that its performance is not
influenced by the soil medium properties, especially the water
content. Although the bandwidth of the MI system is smaller
than that of the EM wave system, it should to a large extent
fulfill the requirements of the WUSNs applications. However,
the transmission ranges of both systems are still too short for a
practical applications in underground medium.

Similar to the strategy in Section III, the MI waveguide is
modeled as a multi-stage transformer, where only adjacent coils
are coupled, as shown in the second row in Fig. 5. Since in practical applications, the transceivers and the relay points usually
use the same type of coils, we assume that all the coils have
the same parameters (resistance, self and mutual inductions).
is the mutual induction between the adjacent coils;
is the
voltage of the transmitter’s battery; is the coil self induction;
is the resistances of the coil; is the capacitor loaded in each
is the load impedance of the receiver. The equivalent
coil;
circuits of the multi-stage transformer is shown in the third row
in Fig. 5, where

IV. MI WAVEGUIDE FOR UNDERGROUND COMMUNICATION
Although the ordinary MI system has constant channel condition and relatively longer transmission range than that of the EM
wave system, its transmission range is still too short for practical
applications. One solution is to employ some relay points between the transmitter and the receiver. Different from the relay
points using the EM wave technique, the MI relay point is just a
simple coil without any energy source or processing device. The
sinusoidal current in the transmitter coil induces a sinusoidal
current in the first relay point. This sinusoidal current in the
relay coil then induces another sinusoidal current in the second
relay point, and so on and so forth. Those relay coils form an MI
waveguide in underground environments, which act as a waveguide that guides the so-called MI waves.
A typical MI waveguide structure is shown in the first row
relay coils equally spaced along one
in Fig. 5, where
axis between the transmitter and the receiver, hence the total
number of coils is ; is the distance between the neighbor
coils; is the distance between the transmitter and the receiver
; is the radius of the coils. Each relay coil
and
(including the transmitter coil and the receiver coil) is loaded
with a capacitor . By appropriately designing the capacitor
value, resonant coils can be formed to effectively transmit the
magnetic signals. There exists mutual induction between any
pair of the coils. The value of the mutual induction depends on

(10)
is the influence of the
coil on the
where
coil and vice versa;
is the induced voltage on the
coil.
Then the received power at the receiver can be calculated as
(11)

B. System Optimization
To maximize the received power is equal to maximize the
induced voltage
at the receiver coil. According to (10), if
the coils are resonant, then the impedance of each coil consists
of only resistance and the absolute value becomes much smaller.
,
Hence we design the capacitor to fulfill

2432

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 7, JULY 2010

then using the expression of the self induction in (7), the value
of the capacitors should be
(12)
In case that the coils are resonant, the expression of the received power
in (10) can be developed as

(13)
where

Basing on the above equations, it can be shown that the multipliis in fact an
order polynomial
cation
of
, which is denoted as
and

(14)
are the coefficients of the
where
polynomial, which is fixed for a certain and not affected by
other parameters.
Since the coils are all resonant, the matched load impedance
. Finally, in the
is pure resistance, which is
MI waveguide system, if the receiver is m away from the transmitter and there are
relay coils between them, the received
power can be expressed as
(15)
.
where is the total transmission range and
The same as the ordinary MI system, the transmission power
and the receiving power of the MI waveguide system decrease
simultaneously as the transmission distance increases. Hence,
is defined in the same
the path loss of the MI waveguide
way

(16)

is defined as the transmission power when the
where
transmitter is very close to the receiver and no relay coil exists.
According to (16), the path loss of the MI waveguide
. It is the polynomial
system is actually a function of
that has the major influence on the path
loss. Therefore the path loss is a monotone increasing function
. Consequently, to minimize the path
of the variable
loss is equal to minimize the variable
. By using the
expressions of the wire resistance and the mutual induction
in (4) and (6) respectively, the variable
can be
expressed as
(17)
of the total
Note that here the relay distance is only
transmission range . By this means the influence of the cubic
function of the distance on the path loss can be significantly
mitigated. Using this scheme, we can reduce the path loss by:
— reducing the ratio of the relay distance to the coil radius
;
— increasing the operating frequency and the number of
turns of the coils ;
— reducing the wire resistance .
However, there are other factors that constrain the path loss minimization.
• To ease the device deployment, the ratio of the relay distance to the coil radius is expected to be as large as possible,
which conflicts with the requirements of the low total path
loss. In this paper, to keep the incontrovertible advantage
over the underground EM wave system, the relay distance
is set to at least the maximum transmission range of EM
wave system, which is 4 m. Considering the coil radius is
0.15 m, the ratio of the relay distance to the coil radius is
over 27 in this paper.
• It is also impossible to unlimitedly increase the operating
frequency and the number of turns of the coils, since
these two parameters are constraint by (12). The loaded
capacitors in each resonant coil should be larger than
10 pF, otherwise it is comparable to the coil parasitic
capacitance. To achieve a practical value of the loaded
cannot be
capacitors in each resonant coil, the and
too large. Moreover, extreme high operating frequency
and large number of turns may induce severe performance
deterioration caused by the parasitic capacitance [22]. In
this paper, we use 10 MHz operating frequency and the
each coil contains 5 loops of wire. The loaded capacitor is
around 35 pF in this case.
• Although reducing the wire resistance can reduce the total
path loss, it may cause two problems: 1) lower wire resistance require larger wire diameter, which cost more and
cause the coils heavier; 2) low wire resistance can also
cause dramatical in-band signal fluctuation, which may
create difficulties on equalization of the received signal. In
this paper, the coil is made of copper wire with a 1.45 mm
diameter. According to AWG standard [17], the resistance
is 0.01
. The influence of different
of unit length
wire resistances will be analyzed in the later part of this
section.

SUN AND AKYILDIZ: MAGNETIC INDUCTION COMMUNICATIONS FOR WUSNs

2433

Fig. 6. Path loss of the MI waveguide system with different wire resistance and
relay distance.

Fig. 7. Bit error rate of the MI waveguide system with different wire resistance,
relay distance and noise level.

C. Numerical Analysis
1) Path Loss: The path losses of MI waveguide system
shown in (16) are evaluated using MATLAB. The results are
shown in Fig. 6. For better comparison, the path loss of the 300
MHz EM wave system in 5% VWC soil and the path loss of
the 10 MHz ordinary MI system are also plotted. According to
the discuss in Section III, the performance of the MI system is
not affected by the soil properties and the soil medium has the
.
same permeability as that in the air, which is
Hence in the evaluation of the MI waveguide, we do not need
to consider the environment parameters. Except studying the
effects of certain parameters, the default values are set as follows: all the coils including the transmitter, receiver and relay
and the number of
points have the same radius of
. The resistance of unit length is
turns is
for normal coil and
for low resistance coil.
The operating frequency is set to 10 MHz. The relay distance
is 5 m. The total number of coils is determined by the
. In Fig. 6, the
transmission distance , where
path losses of the MI waveguide system are shown in dB versus
the transmission distance with different relay distances
and different wire resistances
. It can be found that the MI
waveguide can greatly reduce the signal path loss comparing
with the EM wave system and the ordinary MI system. The
path loss of the MI waveguide is less than 100 dB even after
250 m transmission distance, while the path loss of the EM
wave system and the ordinary MI system becomes larger than
100 dB when the transmission distance is larger than 5 m. In
addition, the path loss can be further reduced by reducing the
relay distance and the wire resistance.
2) Bit Error Rate: In Fig. 7, we investigate the bit error rate
(BER) characteristics of the MI waveguide. The same as the
is selected as the modulation
analysis in Section III,
scheme. Two noise level are considered, where the average noise
in low noise scenario is 103 dBm while
in high
level
is set
noise scenario is 83 dBm. The transmission power
to 10 dBm. In Fig. 7, the BER of the MI waveguide system are
shown as a function of the transmission distance with different
relay distances and different wire resistances . The BER of
the EM wave system and the ordinary MI system are also plotted
for comparison. Comparing with the small transmission range

Fig. 8. Frequency response of the MI waveguide system with different wire
resistance and relay distance.

of the other two techniques (less than 10 m), the transmission
range of the waveguide system is above 250 meters even in the
high noise scenario. It means that the transmission range of the
MI waveguide system is increased for more than 25 times compared with the other two systems. In accord with the analysis on
the path loss, the transmission range of the MI waveguide can be
extended by reducing the relay distance and the wire resistance.
3) Bandwidth: The above path loss and the transmission
range of the MI waveguide system is calculated under the assumption that the transmitted signal has only one frequency.
Under this central frequency, all the coils can achieve the resonant status. However, if there is any deviation from the central
frequency, the resonant status of each coil will disappear and the
load at the receiver also becomes unmatched with the system.
Hence we need to analyze the bandwidth of the MI waveguide
system. In Fig. 8, the frequency response of the MI waveguide
system is shown with different relay distances and different
wire resistances
. The number of relay coils are fixed to
7. The results indicate that, when the operating frequency is
10 MHz, the 3-dB bandwidth of the MI waveguide system is in
the same range with the ordinary MI system, which is 1 KHz to
2 KHz. Although lower wire resistance can reduce the path loss
in the central frequency, the fluctuation of the in-band frequency
response becomes so serious that may cause difficulties in the
equalization at the receiver. The bandwidth can be enlarged by

2434

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 7, JULY 2010

Fig. 10. Frequency response of the MI waveguide system with different deviation from the designed relay distance.

We assume that the relay coils are not deployed at the exact
relay
planed positions but may not deviate a lot. There are
coils deployed between the transceivers and the transmission.
.
Their designed positions are
of relay coil is a Gaussian random variable
The position
and standard deviation . Then
with mean value
intervals with
the transmission distance is divided into
length:
, where
. and
are
the positions of the transmitter and the receiver, respectively. We
assume that the standard deviation are either 5%, 10% or 20% of
the designed relay distance. Other simulation parameters are set
to the default value. The results are the average of 100 iterations.
Both mean value and the standard deviation of the results are
plotted.
It is shown that there exists additional path loss in practical
deployment. Moreover, the bandwidth decreases dramatically
when the standard deviation is 20%. The level of the additional
path loss and the bandwidth decrease are determined by the standard deviation. Higher standard deviation can cause larger performance deterioration. Moreover, the additional path loss also
increases as the transmission distance increase, which is because
that more relay coils are deployed with longer transmission distance hence more deployment deviation may occur. The standard deviation of the path loss and the bandwidth also increases
dramatically as the deployment deviation increases, which indicates that the reliability of the MI waveguide system also decreases if deployment deviation occurs. It should be noted that
the influence of the deployment deviation on the performance of
the MI waveguide system can be neglected if the standard deviation is less than 10%.

reducing the relay distance. However, for a certain transmission
range, reducing the relay distance means that more relay coils
needs to be deployed hence more effort is cost in the deployment. Two practical parameter sets maybe: 1) the relay distance
and the unit length resistance
. In
this case, the 10 MHz operating MI waveguide system can accomplish the communications within 250 m range and achieve
and the
1 KHz bandwidth. And 2) the relay distance
. In this case, the 10 MHz
unit length resistance
operating MI waveguide system has 400 m transmission range
and 2 KHz bandwidth.
4) Influence of Position Deviation: It should be noted that
the above performance of MI waveguide system is derived in the
ideal deployment case, where all the relay coils are accurately
deployed so that the
relay coils are uniformly distributed
between the transceivers. The transmission range is divided into
exactly equal intervals hence the mutual inductions between each relay coil are the same. However, in the practical applications, this requirements may not be precisely satisfied due
to the following two reasons: on the one hand, in the initial deployment stage, the relay coils can not be set in the exact position
as planned because of deployment constraints, such as rocks or
pipes in the soil; on the other hand, the positions of the coils may
change while the network is operating due to the above ground
pressure or the movement of the soil. Hence, in Fig. 9 and Fig. 10,
the influence of the non-ideal deployment is analyzed.

In wireless underground communications, traditional techniques using EM waves encounter three major problems: high
path loss due to material absorption, dynamic channel condition due to various soil properties, and too large antenna size.
MI is an alternative technique that has constant channel condition and can accomplish the communication with small size
coils. However currently there is no detailed analysis on the path
loss and the bandwidth of the MI system in underground soil
medium. In this paper, we provide an analytical model to characterize the underground MI communication channel. Based on
the channel analysis, we develop the MI waveguide technique
to significantly enlarge the transmission range in underground
environments. Our analysis shows the following.
• The MI technique has constant channel condition because
its path loss only depends on the permeability of the propagation medium, which remains the same if the medium is
air, water and most kinds of soil and rock. However, the
material absorption is the major part of the path loss of
EM wave system, which may change a lot in different soil
conditions.
• In underground environments, the path loss of the MI
system is slightly smaller than the EM wave system in
normal and wet soil medium; while in very dry soil, the
EM wave system has smaller path loss. However, due to
the high path loss, both the systems can not provide a
transmission range that is more than 10 m, which prevent

Fig. 9. Path loss of the MI waveguide system with different deviation from the
designed relay distance.

V. CONCLUSION

SUN AND AKYILDIZ: MAGNETIC INDUCTION COMMUNICATIONS FOR WUSNs

2435

them from practical applications. Although the bandwidth
of the MI system and the MI waveguide system is only
1 to 2 KHz, which is much smaller than the EM wave
system, it is enough for the low data rate monitoring
applications of WUSNs. Another advantage of the MI and
MI waveguide system is that, as the transmission range
increases, the transmission power decreases simultaneously with the received power, which is favorable for the
energy-constrained WUSNs.
• The MI waveguide technique can greatly reduce the path
loss, which is attributed to the relay coils deployed between the transceivers. It should be noted that the relay
coils do not consume any energy and the cost is very low.
The relay distance is also larger than the maximum transmission range of the EM wave system. The bandwidth of
the MI waveguide system is in the same range as the ordinary MI system. The transmission range of the MI waveguide system is increased dramatically compared with that
of the ordinary MI system and the EM wave system.

[17] Standard Specification for Standard Nominal Diameters and CrossSectional Areas of AWG Sizes of Solid Round Wires Used as Electrical
Conductors, ASTM Standard B 258-02, ASTM International, 2002.
[18] D. R. Frankl, Electromagnetic Theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1986.
[19] W. M. Telford, L. P. Geldart, and R. E. Sheriff, Applied Geophysics,
2nd ed. New York: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1990.
[20] J. D. Kraus and D. A. Fleisch, Electromagnetics, 5th ed. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1999.
[21] N. Peplinski, F. Ulaby, and M. Dobson, “Dielectric properties of soils
in the 0.3–1.3-GHz range,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sensing, vol.
33, no. 3, pp. 803–807, May 1995.
[22] L. A. Charles and W. A. Kenneth, Electronic Engineering, 3rd ed.
New York: Wiley, 1973.
[23] “YellowJacket Wireless Spectrum Analyzer,” Berkeley Varionics Systems, Inc. [Online]. Available: www.bvsystems.com
[24] J. G. Proakis, Digital Communications, 4th ed. New York: McGrawHill, 1995.

REFERENCES
[1] I. F. Akyildiz, W. Su, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, and E. Cayirci, “Wireless sensor networks: A survey,” Comput. Netw. J., vol. 38, no. 4, pp.
393–422, March 2002.
[2] I. F. Akyildiz and E. P. Stuntebeck, “Wireless underground sensor networks: Research challenges,” Ad Hoc Netw. J., vol. 4, pp. 669–686, Jul.
2006.
[3] L. Li, M. C. Vuran, and I. F. Akyildiz, “Characteristics of underground
channel for wireless underground sensor networks,” presented at the
Med-Hoc-Net’07, Corfu, Greece, Jun. 2007.
[4] T. A. Milligan, Modern Antenna Design, 2nd ed. Piscataway, NJ:
IEEE Press, 2005.
[5] N. Jack and K. Shenai, “Magnetic induction IC for wireless communication in RF-impenetrable media,” presented at the IEEE Workshop
on Microelectronics and Electron Devices (WMED 2007), Apr. 2007.
[6] J. J. Sojdehei, P. N. Wrathall, and D. F. Dinn, “Magneto-inductive (MI)
communications,” presented at the MTS/IEEE Conf. and Exhibition
(OCEANS 2001), Nov. 2001.
[7] R. R. A. Syms, I. R. Young, and L. Solymar, “Low-loss magneto-inductive waveguides,” J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., vol. 39, pp. 3945–3951,
2006.
[8] A. R. Silva and M. C. Vuran, “Development of a testbed for wireless underground sensor networks,” EURASIP J. Wireless Commun.
Netw. (JWCN) [Online]. Available: http://cse.unl.edu/~mcvuran/
ugTestbed.pdf
[9] V. Palermo, “Near-field magnetic comms emerges,” Electron. Eng.
Times, Nov. 2003.
[10] R. Bansal, “Near-field magnetic communication,” IEEE Antennas
Propag. Mag., vol. 46, pp. 114–115, Apr. 2004.
[11] C. Bunszel, “Magnetic induction: A low-power wireless alternative,”
RF Design, vol. 24, no. 11, pp. 78–80, Nov. 2001.
[12] M. Sun, S. A. Hackworth, Z. Tang, G. Gilbert, S. Cardin, and R. J.
Sclabassi, “How to pass information and deliver energy to a network
of implantable devices within the human body,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
on Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBS 2007), Aug.
2007, pp. 5286–5289.
[13] M. C. K. Wiltshire, J. B. Pendry, I. R. Young, D. J. Larkman, D. J.
Gilderdale, and J. V. Hajnal, “Microstructured magnetic materials for
RF flux guides in magnetic resonance imaging,” Science, vol. 291, no.
5505, pp. 849–851, Feb. 2001.
[14] V. A. Kalinin, K. H. Ringhofer, and L. Solymar, “Magneto-inductive
waves in one, two, and three dimensions,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 92, no.
10, pp. 6252–6261, 2002.
[15] R. R. A. Syms, E. Shamonina, and L. Solymar, “Magneto-inductive
waveguide devices,” Proc. IEE Microw. Antennas Propag., vol. 153,
no. 2, pp. 111–121, 2006.
[16] M. C. K. Wiltshire, E. Shamonina, I. R. Young, and L. Solymar,
“Dispersion characteristics of magneto-inductive waves: Comparison
between theory and experiment,” Electron. Lett., vol. 39, no. 2, pp.
215–217, 2003.

Zhi Sun (S’06) received the B.S. degree from
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
(BUPT), Beijing, China and the M.S. degree from
Tsinghua University, Beijing, in 2004 and 2007,
respectively. He is working toward the Ph.D. degree
at the Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta,
under the supervision of Prof. Ian F. Akyildiz.
Currently, he is a Graduate Research Assistant in
the Broadband and Wireless Networking Laboratory
(BWN Lab), School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta.
His current research interests are in wireless underground communication networks and wireless sensor networks.

Ian F. Akyildiz (M’86–SM’89–F’96) received the
B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in computer engineering from the University of Erlangen-Nurnberg,
Germany, in 1978, 1981, and 1984, respectively.
Currently, he is the Ken Byers Distinguished
Chair Professor with the School of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, the Director of Broadband Wireless
Networking Laboratory and Chair of the Telecommunication Group at Georgia Tech. In June 2008, he
became an Honorary Professor with the School of
Electrical Engineering, Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya (UPC), Barcelona,
Spain. He is also the Director of the newly founded NaNoNetworking Center
(N3Cat), Catalunya. He is the Editor in Chief of Computer Networks Journal,
and the founding Editor-in-Chief of the Ad Hoc Networks Journal and
the Physical Communication Journal. His current research interests are in
nano-networks, cognitive radio networks and wireless sensor networks.
Dr. Akyildiz received the “Don Federico Santa Maria Medal” for his services
to the Universidad of Federico Santa Maria, in 1986. From 1989 to 1998, he
served as a National Lecturer for ACM and received the ACM Outstanding
Distinguished Lecturer Award in 1994. He received the 1997 IEEE Leonard
G. Abraham Prize Award (IEEE Communications Society) for his paper
entitled “Multimedia Group Synchronization Protocols for Integrated Services
Architectures” published in the IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED AREAS IN
COMMUNICATIONS (JSAC) in January 1996. He received the 2002 IEEE Harry
M. Goode Memorial Award (IEEE Computer Society) with the citation “for
significant and pioneering contributions to advanced architectures and protocols
for wireless and satellite networking.” He received the 2003 IEEE Best Tutorial
Award (IEEE Communication Society) for his paper entitled “A Survey on
Sensor Networks,” published in IEEE COMMUNICATIONS MAGAZINE, in August
2002. He also received the 2003 ACM Sigmobile Outstanding Contribution
Award with the citation “for pioneering contributions in the area of mobility
and resource management for wireless communication networks.” He received
the 2004 Georgia Tech Faculty Research Author Award for his “outstanding
record of publications of papers between 1999 and 2003.” He also received the
2005 Distinguished Faculty Achievement Award from School of ECE, Georgia
Tech. He has been a Fellow of the Association for Computing Machinery
(ACM) since 1996.

