3212

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

Scalar and Tensor Holographic Artificial Impedance
Surfaces
Bryan H. Fong, Joseph S. Colburn, Member, IEEE, John J. Ottusch, John L. Visher, and
Daniel F. Sievenpiper, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—We have developed a method for controlling electromagnetic surface wave propagation and radiation from complex
metallic shapes. The object is covered with an artificial impedance
surface that is implemented as an array of sub-wavelength
metallic patches on a grounded dielectric substrate. We pattern
the effective impedance over the surface by varying the size of
the metallic patches. Using a holographic technique, we design
the surface to scatter a known input wave into a desired output
wave. Furthermore, by varying the shape of the patches we can
create anisotropic surfaces with tensor impedance properties that
provide control over polarization. As an example, we demonstrate
a tensor impedance surface that produces circularly polarized
radiation from a linearly polarized source.
Index Terms—Antennas, artificial materials, electromagnetic
scattering, holographic gratings, impedance sheets, surface
impedance, surface waves.
Fig. 1. Holographic leaky wave antenna concept. Surface waves (undulating
arrows) are excited on an artificial impedance surface, and are scattered by variations in the surface impedance to produce the desired radiation (straight arrows).

I. INTRODUCTION

A

common challenge for antenna designers is the integration of antennas onto complex metallic shapes while
maintaining the desired radiation characteristics. The antenna
excites currents in nearby conductors, and these currents can
contribute to unexpected artifacts in the radiation pattern,
including shadowing, nulls, cross-polarization, or radiation in
undesired directions.
We have developed a method to control the radiation from
surface currents on metallic bodies. Our method is based on an
artificial impedance surface consisting of a grounded dielectric
layer covered with a pattern of conductive patches. The patches
are small compared to the electromagnetic wavelength, and we
can describe their scattering properties in terms of their effective
surface impedance. By varying the size and shape of the patches,
we can control the surface impedance as a function of position
and direction.
The surface impedance is patterned over the body of interest
using a holographic technique [1] in which we calculate the interference pattern between the currents generated by a source
and the fields associated with the desired radiation, and design

Manuscript received November 13, 2009; revised February 12, 2010; accepted April 08, 2010. Date of publication July 01, 2010; date of current version October 06, 2010. This work was supported in part by the United States
Air Force Office of Scientific Research under Contract FA9550-06-C-0021, The
Boeing Company, General Motors, and in part by Raytheon.
B. H. Fong, J. S. Colburn, J. J. Ottusch and J. L. Visher are with HRL Laboratories, LLC, Malibu, CA 90265 USA.
D. F. Sievenpiper was with HRL Laboratories, LLC, Malibu, CA 90265 USA.
He is now with the University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 920930407 USA (e-mail: sievenpiper@ece.ucsd.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TAP.2010.2055812

the spatial profile of the surface impedance to match this interference pattern. Currents from the source are scattered by the
modulated surface impedance to produce the desired radiation
pattern. The source can be a small feed or a plane wave impinging on the body.
The concept of the holographic artificial impedance surface
was first introduced in several recent conference papers [2]–[4].
In this work, we expand on the previous publications to provide a detailed explanation of how to design and characterize
holographic artificial impedance surfaces, including the equations necessary for others to reproduce our results. We also provide the first measured data for a tensor impedance surface, and
demonstrate that such a surface can generate a high gain beam
with circularly polarized radiation from a small linearly polarized feed.
Holographic artificial impedance surfaces are based on three
established concepts: leaky waves on modulated impedance
surfaces, artificial impedance surfaces, and holographic antennas, illustrated in Fig. 1. The foundation for this work
is Oliner’s comprehensive analysis of leaky waves on modulated impedance surfaces [5] in which he describes how
the propagation and radiation of leaky waves are controlled
by the magnitude, modulation depth, and period of the surface impedance. We have implemented Oliner’s impedance
boundary using an artificial impedance surface, and extended
the modulation concept using a two-dimensional holographic
patterning method. We have also expanded this idea to include
anisotropic or tensor impedance surfaces which can control
polarization.

0018-926X/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE

FONG et al.: SCALAR AND TENSOR HOLOGRAPHIC ARTIFICIAL IMPEDANCE SURFACES

3213

wave modes, but not so far as to introduce other propagating
modes in the free space volume. A practical height for the top
wall is about 1/2 wavelength. We then solve for the eigenmode
that satisfies these boundary conditions to obtain the properties
of the surface wave, and extract the effective surface impedance.
The effective surface impedance can be most easily understood as the ratio of the electric to magnetic fields near the
surface, averaged over the unit cell. For transverse magnetic
direction, the effective surwaves (TM) propagating in the
face impedance is
(1)

Fig. 2. Unit cell used for scalar impedance surface. A square metal patch sits
atop a dielectric layer with a PEC backing. The gap between square patches
determines the effective scalar impedance.

II. ARTIFICIAL IMPEDANCE SURFACES
Various kinds of artificial impedance surfaces have been
studied in the past, such as pin-bed structures [6], and
high-impedance surfaces [7]. Recently, other kinds of two-dimensional metamaterials have been designed to provide other
exotic properties such as left-handed materials [8]–[10].
Because the metallic patterns in these structures are small
compared to the wavelength of interest, they can be described
as effective media. This permits the analysis of their scattering properties using only the macroscopic effective surface
impedance instead of the detailed local geometry, enabling us
to model electrically large structures based on these artificial
materials using practical computing hardware.
Our artificial impedance surface is based on a square lattice
of sub-wavelength conductive patches on a grounded dielectric
substrate. Because the structure is quasi-periodic, we simulate
its effective surface impedance using a single unit cell with periodic boundary conditions, as shown in Fig. 2. This approach
assumes that the structure is uniform, but the results can be
used to design a non-uniform surface if its properties are slowly
varying. For this analysis, we have used both the commercial
Ansoft HFSS code, and our proprietary FastScat code [11] that
has been adapted to include periodic boundary conditions. The
HFSS code is an FEM-based solver, while the FastScat code is
a high-order Nyström discretization frequency domain integral
equation solver. The surface impedance can be calculated using
one of three methods, which are described below.
Using HFSS, we apply periodic boundary conditions to the
four vertical walls of the simulation volume. The bottom wall is
an electric conductor, and the top wall is a radiation boundary.
The simulation also includes a block of dielectric, and a single
square conductive patch. The top wall must be sufficiently far
from the structure not to affect calculation of bound surface

Throughout the paper TM modes have magnetic field transverse
to the direction of surface wave propagation; transverse electric
(TE) modes similarly have electric field transverse to the direction of propagation.
Since both fields decay away from the surface at the same
rate, this ratio is independent of the position above the surface.
However the integration should be done at a height that it is
sufficiently far from the surface that near-field effects are negligible, yet also sufficiently far from the absorbing boundary
condition that it does not affect the calculation of the surface
impedance. The midpoint of the simulation volume is a good
practical choice.
The surface impedance can also be calculated using another
method that does not require integration of the fields. For a
bound surface wave, the refractive index seen by the wave is
the ratio of the speed of light in free space to the phase velocity
, where is
of the wave along the surface,
the surface wave wave vector. Using HFSS, we can calculate an
eigenfrequency for a given phase difference across a unit
cell of length . Since the phase difference across the unit cell
, the index is
is related to the wave vector through
completely determined. Alternatively, using our FastScat code
we can solve for the surface wave wave vector at frequency
, again determining the index . With bound surface waves
, where the
having the functional dependence
subscript denotes quantities in the X-Y plane, Maxwell’s equations and the impedance boundary condition require that the surface impedance for TM modes is related to the decay constant
of the fields away from the surface by [12]
(2)
where
and
is the impedance of free space. Notice
that the ratio
gives the modulus of the surface impedance
normalized to the free space impedance; this observation will
be important in the analysis of tensor impedance surfaces. The
along the surface to
wave equation relates the wave vector
the decay constant
(3)
giving the relationship between the effective refractive index
and the effective surface impedance
(4)

3214

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

This function is inverted to give the gap size as a function
of desired impedance value. After characterizing the surface
impedance for a range of gap sizes, we then build an artificial
impedance surface in which the gap and the effective impedance
vary as a function of position using our holographic patterning
technique.
III. HOLOGRAPHIC PATTERNING

Fig. 3. Plot of impedance Z versus gap g at 17 GHz for the unit cell shown
in Fig. 1. Points show the result of HFSS calculations, and the line is given by
(5). The unit cell has a lattice constant of 3 mm, and the dielectric is 1.57 mm
thick with dielectric constant 2.2. For this range of impedance between 161j

and 234j
, X and M in (8) take the values 197.5 
 and 36.5 
, respectively.

Originally demonstrated at optical frequencies, holography
involves producing an interference pattern using two waves, and
then using the interference pattern to scatter one wave to produce the other. In optical holography, one wave is produced by
scattering a laser beam from the object to be imaged, and the
other is a reference plane wave from the same laser. The interference pattern formed by these two waves is recorded on photographic film. When the reference wave illuminates the developed film, it is scattered by the recorded interference pattern to
produce a copy of the original object wave. For a reference wave
and an object wave
, the interference pattern contains
a term proportional to
. When the interference pattern
is illuminated by the reference wave, this term gives
(6)

This expression is used for transverse magnetic waves, and
a similar expression can be derived for TE waves. This method
produces the same result as integrating the fields, but is much
simpler because it only requires calculating the surface wave
frequency or wave vector.
A third method involves calculating the reflection coefficient of the surface, and extracting the sheet impedance of the
metallic layer. The sheet impedance, and the properties of the
dielectric layer are then used to calculate the effective surface
impedance [13].
As a general rule, higher impedance values are obtained with
a narrower gap, a higher dielectric constant substrate, a thicker
substrate, or a larger period. However, one must take care to
ensure that the period does not exceed the effective medium
limit, and that the substrate is sufficiently thin to suppress higher
order modes.
As an example, we have analyzed a structure based on 1.57
mm thick Rogers Duroid 5880, with a dielectric constant of 2.2,
and a lattice constant of 3 mm. For this analysis, we arbitrarily
choose a phase difference of 72 degrees per cell for the periodic
boundary conditions. The choice of phase difference determines
the location on the dispersion curve, and affects the frequency of
operation. By sweeping the size of the gaps between the metal
patches, we determined the impedance as a function of the gap
width using HFSS. For gaps ranging from 1 mm to 0.2 mm, the
effective impedance varied from 161j to 234j ohms at 17 GHz,
plotted in Fig. 3. Using the HFSS computed impedance data, we
computed a least-squares fit to the impedance as a function of
the inverse gap:
(5)
Here the impedance is in ohms and the gap

is in mm.

i.e., a copy of the original object wave [1].
Microwave holograms [14], [15] are created using a similar
concept. A source antenna produces the reference wave, which
can be a surface wave, [16] and the desired radiation pattern corresponds to the object wave. The microwave hologram is built
as a collection of scatterers that correspond to the interference
pattern produced by these two waves, and it scatters the reference wave to produce the object wave. In our approach, we implement the hologram as a two-dimensional modulated artificial
impedance surface.
The surface impedance is designed by generating the intercorresponding to the curference pattern between a wave
rents generated by the antenna and a wave
corresponding
to the radiation pattern we would like to generate. For a given
on the impedance
radiation pattern, the method requires
surface, i.e., the near field values of the radiating wave evaluated on the impedance surface. The fidelity of the holographically reproduced far field is of course limited by the size of the
impedance surface. As a simple example, assume that we would
like to use a small monopole antenna located at the origin on a
surface occupying the X-Y plane. The currents generated by this
antenna can be approximated as a cylindrical wave
(7)
where corresponds to the effective index seen by the surface
currents, and is the radial distance from the antenna. Assume
that we would like this antenna to produce a narrow pencil beam
in the X-Z plane. The fields on the
in a particular direction
surface associated with this plane wave radiation pattern are represented by
(8)

FONG et al.: SCALAR AND TENSOR HOLOGRAPHIC ARTIFICIAL IMPEDANCE SURFACES

3215

Fig. 4. Scalar impedance pattern formed from holographic interference (8).
Impedance values are shown on a linear scale, with light areas corresponding to
high impedance. The impedance pattern scatters the surface wave from a point
source into a plane wave 60 from the normal.

where is an arbitrary phase offset that sets the impedance value
at the origin. We define the surface impedance as the interference pattern between these two waves

Fig. 5. A portion of the holographic pattern of Fig. 3 implemented using square
patches. High impedance regions have small gaps (and are darker). Gaps vary
between 0.2 mm and 1 mm, i.e., the full range of gaps and impedances shown in
Fig. 2. The unit cell size is fixed at 3 mm. At 17 GHz the free space wavelength
is 17 mm.

(9)
where is an arbitrary real average value,
is the real modulation depth, and is a point on the impedance surface in the
X-Y plane. As in the optical holography case, the radiated (object) wave results from the scattering of the surface wave from
. The holothe modulated impedance, given by
gram pattern shown in Fig. 4 is the interference pattern formed
by a point source and a plane wave propagating 60 degrees from
normal. In practice, we typically set to the average impedance
value for the geometry of choice, and we set to span the entire
available impedance range. However, since the radiation rate is
proportional to , it can be adjusted depending on the size of
the surface to obtain a desired aperture profile.
The holographic pattern shown in Fig. 4 is combined with the
impedance data shown in Fig. 3 to determine the required gap
as a function of position. We combined (5) with (9) to produce a
function describing the gap size versus position on the surface,
and used this to produce a file describing a pattern of squares.
These squares were then printed as metal patches on a 25.4 cm
(Y-dimension) by 40.64 cm (X-dimension) 1.6 mm thick (Z-dimension) Duroid 5880 printed circuit board. A small section of
the pattern of metal squares is shown in Fig. 5.
The surface was fed by a 3 mm long monopole antenna inserted from the back, located at the focus of the ellipses shown in
Fig. 4. Currents generated by the monopole are scattered by the
holographic impedance surface to produce a narrow pencil beam
with a measured gain of about 20 dBi, as
at
shown in Fig. 6, which plots the measured polarized radiation
pattern in the X-Z plane. For comparison, a monopole on a similar smooth metal surface produces the expected low-gain pattern, shown on the same plot. Thus, the holographic impedance
surface has scattered the surface wave to produce the desired
plane wave, with little of the feed energy being directly radiated
into free space.
This example involves TM waves propagating on an inductive
impedance surface to produce vertically polarized radiation. A
similar result can be obtained with TE waves on a capacitive

Fig. 6. Measured radiation patterns from monopole antenna placed above the
holographic impedance surface (black) and a smooth metal surface (grey). The
inclination angle is defined from the impedance surface normal, i.e., the Z-axis,
in the X-Z plane.

impedance surface to produce horizontally polarized radiation.
To generate arbitrary polarization from any source requires a
method of controlling the coupling between currents in any direction and fields in any direction. This requires an anisotropic
surface, which can be described using an impedance tensor.
IV. ARTIFICIAL TENSOR IMPEDANCE SURFACES
In the scalar impedance case the relationship between
impedance and geometrical parameter (metal patch size) is
mapped out by determining the bound mode wave number for
each value of gap . In the tensor impedance case, the relationship between tensor impedance components and geometrical

3216

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

parameters is similarly determined. We derive an equation
relating tensor impedance components to surface wave properties, and we use simulations or measurements to determine the
relationship between geometrical patterning and surface wave
parameters.
For a uniform surface in the X-Y plane, bound surface waves
decay into the surrounding space, and have spatial dependence
; again, subscripts refer to in-plane
quantities. For scalar impedance surfaces, we divide surface
waves into TM, and TE modes, where transversality is with
respect to the surface wave propagation direction . For TM
waves, using the spatial dependence above, the fields are given
is assumed throughout)
[12] by (a time dependence of
(10.a)
(10.b)
For TE waves, the fields are given by
(11.a)
(11.b)
The term
is the transverse wave vector for a
wave traveling across the surface at angle
(12)
From the wave equation, the terms in the wave vector are re. Note that the exponentially
lated through
decaying dependence in the direction results in a negative sign
before .
On a tensor impedance surface, the surface wave modes are in
general neither pure TM nor TE, but rather a hybrid. The electric
and magnetic fields can thus be written as
(13)
and
(14)
The tensor impedance boundary condition on the
is written as

surface

(15)
for the tangential components of and , and the current .
Energy conservation requires that be anti-Hermitian, and reciprocity requires that be pure imaginary [17]. (Notice that this
requires
.) Substituting the combined TM and TE
fields (13) and (14) into the boundary condition (15) gives

(16)

For a given impedance tensor and propagation direction
ratio. The
ratio is
we can solve for and the

,

(17)
where the minus sign corresponds to a TM-like mode, and the
plus sign to a TE-like mode. For TM-like modes, the impedance
tensor has purely inductive eigenvalues and requires that the
negative sign be taken in (17) to produce bound surface waves.
Similarly, for TE-like modes, the impedance tensor’s purely capacitive eigenvalues requires the plus sign be taken in (17) for
bound surface waves. In the scalar impedance case the
ratio (2) gives the -normalized scalar impedance, which is independent of surface wave propagation direction. In the tensor
ratio as giving an efimpedance case we can interpret the
fective normalized scalar impedance that is propagation direction dependent. However, this interpretation does not extend to
the surface electric field and current since they are not generally
aligned. Equation (17) also implies that the mode phase velocity
is direction dependent, as is generally true in an anisotropic
medium.
Equation (17) expresses the effective normalized scalar
impedance as a function of tensor impedance components
and propagation direction. To determine the impedance tensor
components using (17) requires computing or measuring the
effective normalized scalar impedance at three different propa,
gation directions and then solving for the three unknowns
, and
from the three nonlinear constraint equations. If
data from more than three different propagation directions is
available, a least squares solution to the constraint equations
derived from (17) can be used.
The periodic array of metal squares described in the scalar
case can be extended to produce a tensor impedance surface by
adding a slice through each square, and varying the width and
angle of the slice, as illustrated in Fig. 7. For a surface with
given lattice constant, dielectric thickness, and dielectric con,
stant the three independent terms in the impedance tensor,
, and
, are controlled by the three degrees of freedom,
, , and , the width of the gap between the squares.
To understand how the sliced square produces a tensor
impedance surface, consider an electric field in the X-direction
applied to the square with a diagonal slice. Some portion of the
currents in the square will tend to run along the direction of the
slice. Thus, the slice provides coupling between currents in the
X- and Y-directions and fields in the X- and Y-directions.
Fig. 8 plots the effective normalized scalar impedance as a
function of surface wave propagation direction , for the patch
geometry shown in Fig. 7, at a frequency of 10 GHz. The ef,
fective normalized scalar impedance is computed at
90 , 105 , 120 and 150 using FastScat, and the associated

FONG et al.: SCALAR AND TENSOR HOLOGRAPHIC ARTIFICIAL IMPEDANCE SURFACES

3217

of a given geometry’s impedance tensor components; one need
never compute the scalar impedance as a function of propagation direction to construct the tensor hologram.)
For a given metal patch geometry, we are able to compute the
associated impedance tensor using this characterization method.
Implementing a given tensor impedance hologram requires the
solution of the inverse problem: for the given tensor impedance
determine the corresponding metal patch geometry. We solve
the inverse problem by constructing a database of metal patch
geometries and associated impedance tensors, and then numerically invert this mapping.
V. TENSOR SURFACE HOLOGRAPHIC PATTERNING

Fig. 7. Unit cells used for tensor impedance surface. A square metal patch with
slice sits atop a dielectric layer with a PEC backing. The gap g between squares,
the width of the slice g , and the angle  of the slice control the three independent tensor components.

The tensor impedance hologram generalizes the scalar
impedance hologram described above. In the tensor impedance
case, the surface electric field and surface current are related
through
(18)
The tensor impedance function is constructed from the outer
product of the expected vector surface current and the desired
outgoing electric field vector. The outer product generalizes
the simple multiplicative scalar pattern described in (9). In
the scalar case, the desired radiated wave term
results from the scattering of the surface wave from the modulated impedance pattern. In the tensor case, we desire a
resulting from the
radiated vector wave term
scattering of a vector surface wave from a modulated tensor
impedance pattern. A modulated tensor impedance proportional
creates this radiated vector wave term when
to
. (The dagger
illuminated by the reference surface wave
gives the Hermitian conjugate.) Thus, we have
(19)

Fig. 8. Plot of effective scalar impedance as a function of surface wave propa,
gation direction  for the sliced patch unit cells shown in Fig. 6 (g
:
:
), at a frequency of 10 GHz. Points show results of
g
,
FastScat computations at propagation angles of 60 , 90 , 105 , 120 , and 150 .
Least squares solution of (12) gives the continuous curve, with tensor components Z
:
,Z
:
:
, and Z
. Principal axes
: and 
: , with principal values of 384.2j and
are at 
161.2j , respectively.

= 0 2 mm



= 0 2 mm

= 60

= 184 1j 

= 71 3

= 67 6j 

= 018 7

= 361 4j 


Satisfying energy conservation requires subtracting from
its Hermitian conjugate, while satisfying reciprocity requires keeping only the pure imaginary terms. The
resulting impedance tensor that satisfies the energy conservation and reciprocity requirements is then




(20)
impedance tensor components
,
, and
are computed
from a least squares solution to (17). With the computed tensor
components, (17) can again be used to plot the effective normalized scalar impedance as a function of . Instead of the three
,
, and
, the anti-Hermitian impedance
components
tensor may alternatively be described by its principal axes and
angle of the principal axes. The principal axes and angles of the
impedance tensor are also shown in Fig. 8. (Note that the construction of the tensor hologram requires only the determination

In order to demonstrate an antenna that cannot be implemented with a scalar impedance surface, we designed a tensor
impedance surface to scatter currents from a linearly polarized
source to produce circularly polarized radiation. For a feed, we
used a WR90 (X-band) waveguide, mounted centered along the
Y-edge of a 25.4 cm (Y-dimension) by 40.64 cm (X-dimension)
surface. We calculated the interference pattern between currents
from a point source at the waveguide aperture and a left hand

3218

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

. Substituting (21) and (22) into (20), we
where
compute the impedance tensor as a function of position (shown
in Fig. 9)

where

(23)

Fig. 9. Tensor impedance components formed from holographic interference.
Impedance values are shown on a linear scale, with light areas corresponding to
high impedance. The tensor impedance pattern scatters the surface wave from
a vertically polarized point source into a circularly polarized plane wave 45
from the normal. The functional dependences are given in (15).

circularly polarized plane wave at
. Taking the
origin of the coordinate system to be at the point source location
and the impedance surface to lie in the X-Y plane, the desired
outgoing circularly polarized plane wave has electric field given
by
(21)
where
by the point source is given by

. The surface current excited

(22)

,
is the average reactance, and
Here
is the reactance modulation depth. The impedance tensor
given in (23) is the desired functional form for a surface scattering a linearly polarized excitation into a circularly polarized
output.
To implement this functional form for the tensor impedance
we used the sliced-patch geometry pattern on a 1.27 mm thick
Rogers 3010 microwave substrate, with a lattice constant of
3 mm. Using FastScat, we simulated at 10 GHz a range of
varying from 0.2 mm to 1 mm and
geometries with and
0.2 to 0.5 mm, respectively. The slice angle varied over 360
degrees. With these parameters the FastScat computed major
principal axis impedance varied from 116j to 384j Ohms,
and the minor principal axis impedance varied from 115j to
161j Ohms. The angle of the principal axes varied over 360
degrees. For the Rogers 3010 substrate, a scaling function was
required in order to match the FastScat (or HFSS) computed
impedance values to near-field measured impedance values.
The reason behind the need for a scaling function to match
the measured values to the simulated values, which agree
among multiple simulation methods, or to analytical solutions,
[18] is still unknown. We constructed a set of uniform scalar
impedance surfaces and determined their surface impedances
using near-field measurements and FastScat computations. The
scaling function is the function mapping FastScat computed
impedance values to measured impedance values. The scaling
function varied from 1 at low impedance values to 1.37 at
high impedance values. The scaled values corresponding to
the FastScat computed values given above are 121j to 509j
Ohms for the major axis impedance, and 119j to 185j Ohms
for the minor axis impedance. Fig. 10 shows the principal axes’
scaled impedances for a range of gaps and two slice widths
and
.
The functional form in (23) requires that the major principal
and
while the
axis impedance vary between
minor principal axis impedance vary between
and
. From Fig. 10 we see that it is impossible for the sliced
gap structure to satisfy the principal axes’ impedance values
required by (23). For the sliced gap structure, the principal
axes’ accessible impedance ranges never overlap. Because we

FONG et al.: SCALAR AND TENSOR HOLOGRAPHIC ARTIFICIAL IMPEDANCE SURFACES

3219

Fig. 12. A portion of the tensor holographic impedance surface of Fig. 8 and
(15) implemented using sliced gap unit cells.
Fig. 10. Tensor impedance components along a one-dimensional slice on the
impedance surface. Solid lines are impedance components realized using sliced
gap patches; dashed lines are desired impedance components specified by (15).
Thick black lines are the Z component, grey lines are Z , and thin black
lines are Z (= Z ).

Fig. 13. Measured radiation patterns from monopole antenna placed above the
tensor holographic impedance surface. Left-hand circularly polarized radiation
is shown in black; right-hand circularly polarized radiation is in grey.
Fig. 11. Major and minor principal axes impedances as a function of gap size
for two slice gap widths g , at slice angle  = 90 . Black lines are major
axis impedances; grey lines are minor axis impedances. Solid lines are for g =
0:2 mm; dashed lines are for g = 0:5 mm.

are unable to match both principal values of (23) simultaneously, we have chosen to match only the major axis impedance
and the angle of the principal axes; the matching can be accomplished by fixing the slice width at 0.2 mm while varying
only the gap and the slice angle. Fig. 11 shows the impedance
tensor components demanded by (23) and the constructed
impedance tensor components matching only the angle and
major axis impedance, along a diagonal on the surface. The
constructed components match the general trend of the required
components. For the structure that we built, the average reac, and the reactance modulation depth
tance
.

We fabricated and measured the tensor impedance surface
pattern shown in Fig. 9, implemented using our sliced patch
geometry, for which a small section is shown in Fig. 12. Note
that the angle of the slice rotates with each unit cell with
increasing distance from the source, which is at the center
of the left edge of the figure. Fig. 13 contains plots of the
measured far field patterns, in terms of left hand and right
hand circular polarization components. The measure left hand
circular polarization beam peak gain was 21.8 dB at 38 degrees
from the surface normal. At the left hand circular polarization
beam peak the right hand circular polarization component was
down by 19.6 dB. This measured far field data shows good
agreement in terms of polarization purity compared to the
computed pattern for the ideal tensor impedance surface, shown
in a previous publication [4] but the beam peak is off by 7
degrees. An error in beam angle may be caused by an error in

3220

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

the calculated phase velocity of the surface wave. This may be
due to the fact that the impedance of the tensor surface was not
directly measured using the near field technique to determine
the scaling function, but instead we applied a scaling function
obtained from scalar surfaces.
VI. CONCLUSION
We have demonstrated that we can build both scalar and
tensor artificial impedance surfaces, and that these can be used
to design conformal antennas with a range of important properties. Scalar surfaces can be implemented using a simple lattice
of square metal patches with variable gap width, while tensor
surfaces can be implemented by introducing a slice through
the patches having a variable angle. The scalar surface can be
designed to scatter a given surface wave into a desired far-field
radiation pattern, and the tensor surface extends this concept to
provide polarization control. We have used this concept to design and build a surface that can generate a circularly polarized
plane wave from a linearly polarized source. It is possible that
this work can be extended to include a wide range of alternative
geometries that may provide even greater control over the
values of the impedance tensor to enable greater accuracy of
designs and more control over the radiation pattern.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Hariharan, Optical Holography: Principles, Techniques and
Applications. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1996, pp.
11–13.
[2] D. Sievenpiper, J. Colburn, B. Fong, J. Ottusch, and J. Visher,
“Holographic artificial impedance surfaces for conformal antennas,”
presented at the IEEE Antennas and Propagation Symposium Digest,
Washington DC, Jul. 5, 2005.
[3] J. Colburn, D. Sievenpiper, B. Fong, J. Ottusch, and P. Herz, “Advances
in artificial impedance surface conformal antennas,” in IEEE Antennas
and Propagation Symposium Digest, Washington DC, Jun. 9, 2007, pp.
3820–3823.
[4] B. Fong, J. Colburn, P. Herz, J. Ottusch, D. Sievenpiper, and J. Visher,
“Polarization controlling holographic artificial impedance surfaces,” in
IEEE Antennas and Propagation Symposium Digest, Washington DC,
Jun. 9, 2007, pp. 3824–3827.
[5] A. Oliner and A. Hessel, “Guided waves on sinusoidally-modulated
reactance surfaces,” IRE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 7, no. 5, pp.
201–208, Dec. 1959.
[6] R. King, D. Thiel, and K. Park, “The synthesis of surface reactance
using an artificial dielectric,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 31,
no. 3, pp. 471–476, May 1983.
[7] D. Sievenpiper, L. Zhang, R. Broas, N. Alexopolous, and E.
Yablonovitch, “High-impedance electromagnetic surfaces with a
forbidden frequency band,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol.
47, pp. 2059–2074, Nov. 1999.
[8] C. Caloz and T. Itoh, “Transmission line approach of Left-Handed (LH)
materials and microstrip implementation of an artificial LH transmission line,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 52, pp. 1159–1166, May
2004.
[9] C. Caloz, S. Lim, C. A. Allen, and T. Itoh, “Leakage phenomena from
negative refractive index structures,” in Proc. URSI Int. Symp. on Electromagnetic Theory, Pisa, Italy, May 2004, pp. 156–158.
[10] C. Caloz, T. Itoh, and A. Rennings, “CRLH metamaterial leaky-wave
and resonant antennas,” IEEE Antennas Propag. Mag., vol. 50, no. 5,
pp. 25–39, Oct. 2008.
[11] L. F. Canino, J. J. Ottusch, M. A. Stalzer, J. L. Visher, and S. M.
Wandzura, “Numerical solution of the Helmholtz Equation in 2D and
3D using a high-order nystrom discretization,” J. Comput. Phys., vol.
146, pp. 627–663, 1998.

[12] S. Ramo, J. R. Whinnery, and T. Van Duzer, Fields and Waves in Communication Electronics, 2nd ed. New York: Wiley, 1984.
[13] A. M. Patel and A. Grbic, “A printed leaky wave antenna with a sinusoidally modulated surface reactance,” presented at the IEEE Antennas
and Propagation Symp., Charleston, SC, Jun. 1–5, 2009.
[14] R. Dooley, “X-band holography,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 53, no. 11, pp.
1733–1735, Nov. 1965.
[15] W. Kock, “Microwave holography,” Microwaves, vol. 7, no. 11, pp.
46–54, Nov. 1968.
[16] P. Checcacci, V. Russo, and A. Scheggi, “Holographic antennas,” IEEE
Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 811–813, Nov. 1970.
[17] D. J. Hoppe and Y. Rahmat-Samii, Impedance Boundary Conditions
in Electromagnetics. Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1995, pp.
135–137.
[18] O. Luukkonen, C. Simovski, G. Granet, G. Goussetis, D. Lioubtchenko, A. Raisanen, and S. Tretyakov, “Simple and accurate
analytical model of planar grids and high-impedance surfaces comprising metal strips or patches,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol.
56, no. 6, pp. 1624–1632, Jun. 2008.

Bryan H. Fong received the B.S. degree in physics
from Yale University, New Haven, CT, in 1993 and
the M.A. and Ph.D. degrees in plasma physics from
Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, in 1995 and
1999, respectively.
He is a Senior Research Staff Physicist in the
Computational Physics Department, HRL Laboratories, LLC, Malibu, CA. He joined HRL Laboratories
in 2001, following postdoctoral research at the
National Center for Atmospheric Research. His
research has been in nonlinear instabilities in laboratory and astrophysical plasmas, computational electromagnetics, high-order
numerical methods, and quantum information.
Dr. Fong is a member of the American Physical Society.

Joseph S. Colburn (M’92) received the B.S. degree
from the University of Washington, Seattle, in 1992,
and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from University of
California, Los Angeles, in 1994 and 1998 respectively, all in electrical engineering.
Since 1998, he has been with HRL Laboratories,
Malibu, CA, where he is currently the Antenna Department Manager in the Applied Electromagnetics
Laboratory. At HRL he has worked on millimeter and
microwave antennas and circuits for aerospace and
automotive applications. From 1995 to 1997, he was
with the TRW Space and Electronics Group where he was involved with the design and measurement of satellite antennas. He has over 25 papers published in
technical publications and was issued 10 patents.

John J. Ottusch was born in Landstuhl, Germany, in
1955. He received the S.B. degree in physics form the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
and the Ph.D. degree in physics from the University
of California, Berkeley, in 1977 and 1985, respectively.
In 1985, he joined Hughes Research Laboratories
(now HRL Laboratories), Malibu, CA. Until 1994,
his research involved experimental investigations of
nonlinear optics, including Raman and Brillouin scattering and optical phase conjugation. Since that time
he has focused primarily on developing fast, high-order algorithms and software
for electromagnetic modeling.

FONG et al.: SCALAR AND TENSOR HOLOGRAPHIC ARTIFICIAL IMPEDANCE SURFACES

John L. Visher received the B.A. degree from the
University of California in Santa Cruz, in 1979 and
the M.A. degree from Columbia University, New
York, in 1981, both in physics.
For over 23 years he has worked in HRL Laboratories, Malibu, CA, and its previous corporate incarnations. He has written more code for more projects
than he can or cares to remember. His most recent
code models EM in the time domain with novel high
order stable and explicit techniques.

3221

Daniel F. Sievenpiper (M’94–SM’04–F’09) received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical
engineering from the University of California, Los
Angeles, in 1994 and 1999, respectively.
Since 2010, he has been a Professor at the University of California, San Diego, where his research
focuses on antennas and electromagnetic structures.
Previously, he was the Director of the Applied
Electromagnetics Laboratory at HRL Laboratories
in Malibu, CA, where his research included artificial
impedance surfaces, conformal antennas, tunable
and wearable antennas, and beam steering methods. He has more than 60 issued
patents and published more than 50 technical publications.
Dr. Sievenpiper was awarded the URSI Issac Koga Gold Medal in 2008, and
in 2009 he was named as a Fellow of the IEEE. In 2010, he was elected to the
Antennas and Propagation Society Administrative Committee.

