IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2010

3821

Asymmetric-Circular Shaped Slotted Microstrip
Antennas for Circular Polarization and
RFID Applications
Nasimuddin, Senior Member, IEEE, Zhi Ning Chen, Fellow, IEEE, and Xianming Qing, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Novel asymmetric-circular shaped slotted microstrip
patch antennas with slits are proposed for circularly polarized
(CP) radiation and radio frequency identification (RFID) reader
applications. A single-feed configuration based asymmetric-circular shaped slotted square microstrip patches are adopted to
realize the compact circularly polarized microstrip antennas. The
asymmetric-circular shaped slot(s) along the diagonal directions
are embedded symmetrically onto a square microstrip patch
for CP radiation and small antenna size. The CP radiation can
be achieved by slightly asymmetric (unbalanced) patch along
the diagonal directions by slot areas. Four symmetric-slits are
also embedded symmetrically along the orthogonal directions of
the asymmetric-circular shaped slotted patch to further reduce
antenna size. The operating frequency of the antenna can be
tuned by varying the slit length while keeping the CP radiation
unchanged. The measured 3-dB axial-ratio (AR) bandwidth of
around 6.0 MHz with 17.0 MHz impedance bandwidth is achieved
for the antenna on a RO4003C substrate. The overall antenna size
0 27
0 0137 at 900 MHz.
is 0 27
Index Terms—Circular polarization (CP), circularly polarized antenna, microstrip antenna, radio frequency identification
(RFID), slotted patch, UHF.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE radio frequency identification (RFID) system in the
ultra high frequency (UHF) band has gained popularity in
many applications, as it provides longer readable range and fast
reading speed [1]. RFID technology relates to the short-range
wireless communications and uses the radio frequency to read
certain information from a device (tag). The RFID system consists of the reader and the tag. Commonly, the UHF tag antennas
are linearly polarized. Because of the random orientation of the
tags in actual application scenarios, a circularly polarized antenna for the RFID reader is required to get a most efficient UHF
RFID system. The commercial use of the UHF RFID system in
logistics, and supply chain management has become very popular, which has made compact handheld reader units become
more and more important.

T

Manuscript received February 25, 2010; revised May 20, 2010; accepted
June 11, 2010. Date of publication September 23, 2010; date of current version
November 30, 2010.
The authors are with the Institute for Infocomm Research, Singapore 138632,
Singapore (e-mail: nasimuddin@i2r.a-star.edu.sg).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TAP.2010.2078476

The reader antenna is one of the important components in
the RFID system. Circularly polarized microstrip antennas
(CPMAs) can reduce the loss caused by the multipath effects
between the reader and the tag antenna. Frequencies specifically that have been reserved for the ISM (industrial, scientific,
medical) bands can be used for the RFID applications. Due
to the merits of high data transfer rate and broad readable
range, passive RFID systems at the UHF band are preferred
in many applications. The total frequency span of the UHF
band used for RFID systems is 840–960 MHz. However,
there is not a UHF range accepted worldwide for the RFID
applications. The system operates at the bands of 902–928
MHz in America, 865–867 MHz in Europe, and 840–955
MHz in Asia-Pacific region. In Asia-Pacific region, the UHF
RFID frequency range is different in different countries: China
(840.5–844.5 MHz, 920.5–924.5 MHz), Japan (952–955 MHz),
India (865–867 MHz), Hong Kong (865–868 MHz, 920–925
MHz), Taiwan (920–928 MHz), Korea (908.5–910 MHz,
910–914 MHz), Singapore (866–869 MHz, 923–925 MHz),
Australia (920–926 MHz), etc. As a result, except the America
UHF RFID frequency-band, in other countries UHF RFID
allocation bandwidths are between 3 to 6 MHz. The broadband
CPMA designs to cover total frequency span of the UHF band
for RFID applications have been reported [2], [3]. The sizes of
the broadband CPMAs are bulky and not suitable for handheld
or portable reader applications.
The single-feed CPMAs are usually more compact as compared to the dual-feed CPMAs [4]. The major consideration for
the CP microstrip antenna design of handheld/portable RFID
reader applications is overall compact size of the antenna; the
antenna gain and bandwidth are not so critical. However, the antenna must cover at least one UHF RFID band with bandwidth
of few MHz. The small size of the CPMA can be achieved at the
cost of limited gain, narrow 3-dB AR bandwidth and impedance
bandwidth. Various techniques have been published [5]–[10] to
generate the CP radiation of the single-feed microstrip antennas.
The single-feed square patch was proposed by Sharma
and Gupta for CP radiation using the symmetric truncated
corners method [5]. The single-feed CP annular-ring, square
and circular patch antennas with perturbation elements (symmetric cross, inner stubs techniques etc.) have been reported in
[6]–[10]. The study of the asymmetric-circular shaped slotted
microstrip patches (ACSSMPs) for the CP radiation has not
been published in open literature.
In this paper, novel CP ACSSMP antennas are proposed for
the UHF RFID handheld reader applications. An ACSSMP an-

0018-926X/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE

3822

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2010

Fig. 2. Examples of the ACSSMP (a) one circular-slot, (b) two circular-slots,
(c) three circular-slots, (d) four circular-slots.

Fig. 1. (a) Cross-section view of the proposed antenna. (b) Asymmetric-circular shaped slotted microstrip patch.

tenna with slits gives a compact antenna configuration. A new
asymmetric-circular shaped slotted square patch is used to generate a CP radiation with compact antenna size. By slightly
varying the radius of the circular-slots in diagonal directions of a
square patch, CP radiation of the antenna can be obtained. The
symmetric-slits are embedded along the orthogonal directions
on the ACSSMP for further size reduction of the microstrip antenna. In addition, the slits can also be used for tuning of the operating frequency-band. The CP ACSSMP antenna with slits is
designed, fabricated and tested. The measured results are compared with simulated results obtained from the IE3D commercial simulator [11].
II. ASYMMETRIC-CIRCULAR SHAPED SLOTTED PATCH
ANTENNA AND DESIGN
The cross-section view of the proposed asymmetric-circular
shaped slotted (unbalanced) square microstrip patch antenna is
shown in Fig. 1(a). Length of the square patch is (78.0 mm)
and ground-plane size of the antenna is 90.0 mm 90.0 mm.
is the coaxial feed-location from the patch center. The overall
antenna size is designed based on the handheld/portable RFID
reader requirements.
The proposed CP ACSSMP is shown in Fig. 1(b). For CP radiation, proposed ACSSMP has to support two orthogonal resonance modes with a 90 phase shift. The orthogonal modes
are excited by asymmetries along the axis of a patch using the
circular slots at 45 to the feed-location axis. The ACSSMP is
proposed for the CP radiation with size reduction of the antenna.

The locations of four unequal circular-slots ( ,
to 4,
where is radii of circular-slots) are located symmetrically at
,
along the diagonal directions
from center of
the square patch as shown in Fig. 1(b). The coaxial feed-location is on the -axis and it is 45 from the asymmetries by the
circular-slots on the patch radiator. By slightly changing radii
of the slot(s) in diagonal directions, the CP radiation can be obtained. The relation of the circular-slot radii on the patch should
(four circular-slots) or
(three cirbe
(two circular-slots) or
(one circularcular-slots) or
slot). In addition, the slotted patch radiator is also useful for the
antenna size reduction.
III. ASYMMETRIC-CIRCULAR SHAPED SLOTTED MICROSTRIP
PATCH EXAMPLES
In this section, the ACSSMP antennas are studied and
compared. The proposed slotted square microstrip patch
antenna with slits is fabricated on a RO4003C substrate (thick, dielectric
and loss
ness,
). Four examples of the ACSSMPs are
illustrated in Fig. 2(a)–(d). The structural dimensions in mm
of the
are shown on the patch sketches. The locations
circular-slot(s) are selected symmetrically from the patch center
. The coaxial feed-location is on the
at
-axis at a distance of 15.0 mm from the slotted square patch
center.
A circular-slot is embedded in one of the diagonal direcas shown in Fig. 2(a). The radius
of the
tions
circular-slot is optimized for CP radiation. The two unequal
circular-slots ( and ) are embedded in diagonal directions
and
respectively as shown in Fig. 2(b). For CP radiation in this case, the relation between two circular-slot radii

NASIMUDDIN et al.: ASYMMETRIC-CIRCULAR SHAPED SLOTTED MICROSTRIP ANTENNAS FOR CP AND RFID APPLICATIONS

3823

should be
. The three unequal circular-slots can also be
embedded for the CP radiation as shown in Fig. 2(c). The relafor CP radiation of
tion between slot radii should be
the antenna. A group of four unequal circular-slots
are em. The
bedded symmetrically along the diagonal directions
of the slots are optimized for CP radiaradii
tion. Fig. 2(d) shows four unequal slots based ACSSMP.
The simulated return loss, boresight AR and boresight gain
of the four examples are plotted in Fig. 3(a)–(c), respectively. It
is found that the resonance frequency of the ACSSMP antenna
decreases with increase of slotted area on the patch radiator. As a
result, the antenna size is reduced. The operating frequency also
decreases with increase number of circular-slots on the patch.
The minimum AR frequency also decreases with increase in
number of unequal slots or increase in slotted area on the patch
radiator as shown in Fig. 3(b). The boresight gain slightly decreases with increase in the slotted area on the patch radiator.
This is due to decrease in electrical antenna size with increase in
slotted area on the patch. The slotted area can be increased with
four unequal circular slots in diagonal directions of the square
patch.
IV. ACSSMP ANTENNA WITH SLITS
To further reduce the size of antenna, symmetric-slits are
embedded along the orthogonal directions on the ACSSMP
(Fig. 2(d)) for the RFID handheld reader applications. Our aim
is to design of a single-feed compact CPMA at around 900 MHz
and
for the UHF RFID handheld reader applications. The
are slit width and slit length respectively. The four slots based
ACSSMP with slits is illustrated in Fig. 4(a). The optimized
are
,
,
circular-slots radii
and
respectively. The width
and length
of the slits are
optimized for the operating frequency of the antenna at around
900 MHz. The square patch and the CP truncated corners
square patch radiators [5] are shown in Fig. 4(b) and (c) respectively for comparison. The conventional truncated corners
square patch is also designed and optimized for CP radiation.
is 8.25 mm. The
The optimized truncated corner length
feed-location for this antenna is
.
A. Comparison of CP Microstrip Patch Antennas
In this section, simulated results of the square patch antenna,
CP truncated corners square patch antenna, proposed CP ACSSMP with and without slits (Fig. 2(d)) antennas are compared
with a fixed ground-plane and square patch radiator sizes. The
simulated return losses of the antennas are plotted in Fig. 5(a).
The square patch antenna resonance frequency is around 1.0
GHz. However, the conventional truncated CP corners patch antenna resonance frequency is around 1.01 GHz. The truncated
patch antenna resonance frequency is highest as compared to
other antennas. As a result, the truncated corners method did
not provide any size reduction of the patch antenna for CP radiation. So it can be concluded that truncated corners method is not
useful for compact CPMA designs. The ACSSMP antenna resonance frequency is around 0.97 GHz. The ACSSMP antenna
resonance frequency is lower as compared to the square patch

Fig. 3. Simulated results of the ACSSMP antennas: (a) return loss, (b) axialratio at the boresight, (c) gain at the boresight.

antenna and the truncated corners patch antenna. This is due to
meandering of the surface current path on an ACSSMP radiator. Accordingly, resonance frequency of the antenna is shifted
down. The slits can also be used for further size reduction of the
antenna. The ACSSMP antenna with slits resonance frequency
is lowest and it is around 0.907 GHz. With fixed ground-plane
and patch sizes, the slotted patch antenna with slits is electrically smallest. The slit length also can be used to tune operating
frequency of the patch antenna for the desired frequency-band.

3824

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2010

Fig. 4. Square patch radiators: (a) proposed ACSSMP with slits, (b) square
patch, (c) truncated corners square patch.

The simulated AR at the boresight of the antennas is plotted
in Fig. 5(b). The minimum AR frequencies are around 0.909
GHz, 0.974 GHz and 1.007 GHz for the ACSSMP antenna with
slits, ACSSMP antenna and truncated corners patch antenna,
respectively. It is to be noted that the square patch antenna is
. The minimum AR frequency
linear polarized
is lowest for the ACSSMP with slits antenna. The conventional
truncated corners patch, proposed ACSSMP antennas with and
without slits show good CP radiation. Fig. 5(c) shows the gain
at the boresight of the antennas. The gain of the conventional
truncated corners patch radiator and the square patch antennas
is a little bit larger compared to the proposed slotted patch antennas. This is due to electrically larger size of the truncated corners patch and the square patch antennas. Note that the slotted
.
patch radiator with slits has lowest gain
B. Variation of Symmetric-Slit-Length

of ACSSMP

from
In this section, the effects of varying the length
14.0 mm to 17.0 mm are studied. The resonance frequency decreases with increase in the slit length as shown in Fig. 6(a). By
changing the slit length, the antenna can easily be optimized to
the center of the desired frequency-band. Fig. 6(b) shows the
variation of AR at the boresight with slit length. The minimum
AR frequency also decreases with increase in slit length. It is
found that the CP radiation is not degraded with variation of the
slit length. This is very useful because CP radiation (minimum
AR) frequency also decreases in the same way as operating resonance frequency with increase in slit length. Accordingly, frequency at which maximum boresight gain is slightly decreases
with increase in the slit length. The variation of boresight gain
with respect to frequency of the antennas is plotted in Fig. 6(c).

Fig. 5. Simulated antennas performances: (a) return loss. (b) axial-ratio at the
boresight, (c) gain at the boresight.

The slit length can be used to tune the operating frequency of the
antenna while keeping good CP radiation. However the other antenna parameters are fixed.
C. Results and Discussions
The proposed four slots based ACSSMP antenna is optimized
of 16.0
at around 900 MHz UHF band using slit length
mm. The antenna is linear polarized radiation, when circular
are equal. For CP radiation
slot radii

NASIMUDDIN et al.: ASYMMETRIC-CIRCULAR SHAPED SLOTTED MICROSTRIP ANTENNAS FOR CP AND RFID APPLICATIONS

3825

Fig. 7. Current distribution on four slots based ACSSMP radiator with slits at
0.907 GHz.

The proposed antenna design was fabricated and tested to validate the simulated results. The measured and simulated results
of return loss, AR at the boresight and gain at the boresight
are plotted in Fig. 8(a)–(c) respectively. The measured 10-dB
return loss bandwidth is 17.0 MHz (899–916 MHz) and the
simulated bandwidth is 15.0 MHz (901–916 MHz). The good
agreement is observed between simulated and measured return
loss results. The measured 3-dB AR bandwidth is more than 6.0
MHz (904–909 MHz) and it is within the measured 10-dB return
loss bandwidth. The simulated 3-dB AR bandwidth is more than
5.0 MHz (907–911 MHz). The agreement of the simulated and
measured 3-dB AR bandwidth is good. The measured 3-dB AR
bandwidth is able to cover one RFID UHF band. The measured
maximum boresight gain is 3.7 dBic at 906 MHz. The gain remains relatively constant around 3.5 dBic with variation of less
than 0.2 dB within the 3-dB AR bandwidth. The simulated gain
at the boresight is slightly higher than the measured gain values.
The radiation patterns of the antenna were measured with a
rotating linear polarized transmitting horn antenna for the and - principal planes. Fig. 9(a) and (b) show the measured
normalized radiation patterns at 904 MHz and 908 MHz, respectively, in the - and - planes. The 3-dB AR beamwidth
is more than 100 for both principal planes ( - and - ). The
proposed antenna is compact and has wide beam CP radiation.
The antenna can be useful for the UHF RFID handheld readers.
Fig. 6. Variation of slit length: (a) return loss, (b) axial-ratio at the boresight,
and (c) gain at the boresight.

the relation between radii of the circular-slots should be unequal
. The current distribution on the ACSSMP radiator with slits is shown in Fig. 7. The strongest current distribution is around the farther end of the slits and around the
unequal circular-slots. The four unequal circular-slots and the
slits on the radiating patch can cause meandering of the excited
surface current paths. Accordingly, resonance frequency of the
antenna is lowered as compared to the square patch without slots
and slits. So the electrical size of the antenna is reduced.

V. ACSSMP ANTENNA WITH SLITS ON FR4 SUBSTRATE
In this section, the circularly polarized two slots based ACSSMP antenna fabricated on an FR4 substrate (thickness,
, dielectric
and loss
)
for the low-cost antenna design is presented. The example of two
circular-slots based ACSSMP (Fig. 2(b)) is used with slits for
the compact CP antenna design. This antenna is also designed
for the handheld RFID reader applications. The designed and
, ground plane
optimized antenna dimensions are;
,
,
,
,
, and
coaxial feed-location
. The designed antenna on the FR4 substrate also

3826

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2010

Fig. 9. Measured radiation patterns of the antenna: (a) 904 MHz and
(b) 908 MHz for both planes (x-z and y -z planes).

the gain of the antenna on a FR4 substrate is lower
.
The overall antenna sizes are almost same for both substrates.
A. Comparison of the CP RFID Reader Antennas
The proposed ACSSMP antenna sizes and measured performances are compared with some commercially available
RFID CP reader antennas in Table I. The commercially available reader antennas are bulky and not suitable for the RFID
handheld reader applications. However, the commercial CP
reader antennas are broadband with higher gain. Moreover the
proposed compact CP antennas have wide 3-dB AR beamwidth
(100 ) as compared to the commercially available CP reader
antennas.
B. RFID Tag Reading Range Measurement

Fig. 8. Simulated and measured results of the antenna: (a) return loss, (b) axialratio at the boresight, and (c) gain at the boresight.

was fabricated and tested. The measured 10-dB return loss bandwidth is 4.01% (904–941 MHz) with 1.2% or 12 MHz (918–929
MHz) 3-dB AR bandwidth. The 3-dB AR beamwidth is more
than 100 same as the antenna on a RO4003 substrate. The antenna on a FR4 substrate has larger 3-dB AR bandwidth as compared to the antenna on a Rogers RO4003C substrate. However

To validate the proposed antennas for the RFID reader applications, the tag reading-range were measured for the proposed antennas on RO4003C and low-cost FR4 substrates. The
MP9320 2.8 EPC UHF reader and home made UHF tag were
used for the measurement of the reading range. The reading
range indicates maximum distance of the tag from the reader
antenna, where the tag can be detected properly by the handheld
RFID reader. The measurement was conducted at the boresight,
30 and 45 offset from the boresight of the antenna. The maximum reading range of 65–70 cm is achieved at the boresight
and 63–68 cm is achieved at the directions of around 30 and
45 offset from the boresight for the antenna on RF4 substrate.
The maximum tag reading range at the boresight is about 92–96
cm for the antenna on a RO4003C. The reading range for the
antenna on a Rogers RO4003C substrate is larger as compared
to the antenna on a FR4 substrate. Because the antenna on a
RO4003C substrate has higher gain compared to the antenna on
an FR4 substrate.

NASIMUDDIN et al.: ASYMMETRIC-CIRCULAR SHAPED SLOTTED MICROSTRIP ANTENNAS FOR CP AND RFID APPLICATIONS

TABLE I
CIRCULARLY POLARIZED UHF RFID READER ANTENNAS

VI. CONCLUSION
Novel asymmetric-circular shaped slotted square microstrip
patch antennas with slits have been presented for the CP radiation and UHF RFID handheld reader applications. Two examples of the ACSSMP with slits have also been demonstrated for
the UHF RFID handheld readers on Rogers RO4003C substrate
and low cost FR4 substrate. The antenna on a RO4003C substrate has a higher gain as compared to the antenna on a FR4
substrate. It has been shown that by changing slit lengths along
the orthogonal directions the operating frequency-band of the
antenna can be tuned with good CP radiation. The antennas have
wide angle CP radiation of around 100 . The proposed ACSSMP antennas are compact and these can be conveniently used
in applications such as in handheld/portable UHF RFID readers.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish thank T. M. Chiam for fabrication of the
antenna prototype, C. K. Goh for helping in measurement of
reading range of the antennas, K. K. Jonathan and S. N. Altaf
for discussion on this work.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Finkenzeller, RFID Handbook, 2nd ed. New York: Wiley, 2003.
[2] H. L. Chung, X. Qing, and Z. N. Chen, “Broadband circularly polarized
stacked probe-fed patch antenna for UHF RFID applications,” Int. J.
Antennas Propag., vol. 2007, pp. 1–9, 2007.
[3] Z. N. Chen, X. Qing, and H. L. Chung, “A universal UHF RFID reader
antenna,” IEEE Trans Microwave Theory Tech., vol. 57, no. 5, pp.
1275–1282, May 2009.

3827

[4] D. M. Pozar and S. M. Duffy, “A dual-band circularly polarized aperture-coupled stacked microstrip antenna for global positing satellite,”
IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 45, no. 11, pp. 1618–1624, 1997.
[5] P. C. Sharma and K. C. Gupta, “Analysis and optimized design of single
feed circularly polarized microstrip antennas,” IEEE Trans. Antennas
Propag., vol. 29, pp. 949–955, 1983.
[6] H. Iwasaki, “A circularly polarized small size microstrip antennas
with cross slot,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 44, no. 10, pp.
1399–1401, 1996.
[7] K. L. Wong and Y. F. Lin, “Circularly polarized microstrip antenna
with a tuning stub,” Electron. Lett., vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 831–832, 1998.
[8] H. M. Chen and K. L. Wong, “On the circular polarization operation
of annular-ring microstrip antennas,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag.,
vol. 47, pp. 1289–1292, 1999.
[9] W. S. Chen, C. K. Wu, and K. L. Wong, “Novel compact circularly
polarized square microstrip antenna,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag.,
vol. 49, pp. 340–342, 2001.
[10] J. S. Row and C. Y. Ai, “Compact design of single-feed circularly polarized microstrip antenna,” Electronics Letters, vol. 40, no. 18, pp.
1093–1094, 2004.
[11] IE3D Version 14.0. Fremont, CA, Zeland Software Inc., Oct. 2007.
[12] Alien/ALR-9611-CR [Online]. Available: http://www.rfidsupplychain.
com/-strse-13/Alien-915-MHz-Circular/Detail.bok
[13] Intermec/IA33A [Online]. Available: http://www.intermec.com/products/rfid_ant_ia33a/index.aspx
[14] Motorola/ AN200/AN480 [Online]. Available: http://www.motorola.
com/business
[15] PoyntingAntennas/PANL-A0011 [Online]. Available: http://www.
poynting.co.za/directorylisting/
[16] MTI/MT-262014/NRH [Online]. Available: http://www.mtiwe.com/
uploads/product/446.pdf
[17] GaoRFIDInc/326005 [Online]. Available: http://www.gaorfid.com/
index.php?main_page=in dex&cPath=90
[18] ThingMagic/ANT-NA-2CO [Online]. Available: http://buyrfid.com
/catalog/product_info.php/manufacturers_id/14/products_id/213?osC
sid=abea7163ca2fbfdb2c

Nasimuddin (SM’07) was born in February, 1975 in
Bulandshahar, India. He received the M.Sc. degree in
electronics from the Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi,
India, in 1996, the M.Tech. degree in microwave electronics from the University of Delhi, India, in 1998
and the Ph.D. degree from the University of Delhi,
Delhi, India, in 2004, for theoretical work in the field
of multilayered slow-wave microstrip structures and
microstrip patch antennas.
From 2004 to 2006, he was an Australian Postdoctoral Fellow with Macquarie University, Sydney,
Australia. Currently, he is working as a Researcher at the Department of RF and
Optical, Institute for Infocomm Research, Singapore. He has published over 40
refereed journal articles. His research interest includes the areas of the multilayered microstrip based structures, millimeter-wave antennas, RFID reader
antennas, UWB antenna, and circularly polarized microstrip antennas.
Dr. Nasimuddin is a senior member of the IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society. He was awarded the very prestigious Senior Research Fellowship
from the CSIR Government of India in Engineering Science (2001–2003). He
was awarded a Fellowship from the Australian Research Council (2004–2006)
and the Young Scientist Award from the International Union of Radio Science
(URSI) in 2005.

Zhi Ning Chen (F’03) received the B.Eng., M.Eng.,
Ph.D., and DoE degrees from the Institute of Communications Engineering, China and University
of Tsukuba, Japan, respectively, all in electrical
engineering.
During 1988–1997, he worked at the Institute of
Communications Engineering, Southeast University
and City University of Hong Kong, China with
teaching and research appointments. In 1997, he was
awarded a JSPS Fellowship to join the University
of Tsukuba, Japan. In 2001 and 2004, he visited

3828

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 58, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2010

the University of Tsukuba under a JSPS Fellowship Program (senior level).
In 2004, he worked at IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, New York, as an
Academic Visitor. Since 1999, he has worked with Institute for Infocomm
Research and his current appointments are Principal Scientist and Department
Head for RF & Optical. He is concurrently holding Adjunct/Guest Professors
at Southeast University, Nanjing University, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Tongji University and National University of Singapore. He has published 280
journal and conference papers as well as authored and edited the books entitled
Broadband Planar Antennas, UWB Wireless Communication, Antennas for
Portable Devices, and Antennas for Base Station in Wireless Communications.
He also contributed to the books of UWB Antennas and Propagation for Communications, Radar, and Imaging as well as Antenna Engineering Handbook.
He holds 28 granted and filed patents with 17 licensed deals with industry.
His current research interest includes applied electromagnetics, antennas for
applications of microwave, mmW, submmW, and THz in imaging systems.
Prof. Chen is a Fellow of the IEEE for his contribution to small and broadband
antennas for wireless and IEEE AP-S Distinguished Lecturer (2008–2010). He
has organized many international technical events as key organizer. He is the
founder of International Workshop on Antenna Technology (iWAT). He is the
recipient of the CST University Publication Award 2008, IEEE AP-S Honorable
Mention Student Paper Contest 2008, IES Prestigious Engineering Achievement
Award 2006, I R Quarterly Best Paper Award 2004, and IEEE iWAT 2005 Best
Poster Award.

Xianming Qing (M’90) was born in May 1965,
in China. He received the B.Eng. degree from the
University of Electronic Science and Technology of
China (UESTC), in 1985 and the Dr. Eng. degree
from Chiba University, Japan, in 2010.
During 1987–1996, he was with the UESTC for
teaching and research and appointed as a Lecturer in
1990 and an Associate Professor in 1995. He joined
National University of Singapore (NUS) in 1997 as
a Research Scientist, where he focused on study of
high-temperature superconductor (HTS) microwave
devices. Since 1998, he has been with the Institute for Infocomm Research
(I2R, formerly known as CWC and ICR), Singapore. He is currently holding
the position of Research Scientist and the Leader of the Antenna Group under
the RF and Optical Department. His main research interests are antenna design
and characterization for wireless applications. In particular, his current R&D
focuses on small and broadband antennas/arrays for wireless systems, such as
ultrawideband (UWB) systems, radio frequency identification (RFID) systems
and medical imaging systems, microwave, mmW, submmW, and THz imaging
systems. He has authored and coauthored over 100 technical papers published
in international journals or presented at international conferences, and five book
chapters. He holds eight granted and filed patents.
Dr. Qing received six awards of advancement of science and technology in
China. He is also the recipient of the IES Prestigious Engineering Achievement Award 2006, Singapore. He served as Organizer and Chair for special
sessions on RFID antennas at the IEEE Antenna and Propagation Symposium
2007 and 2008. He also served the Guest Editor of the special issue Antennas
for Emerging Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) Applications of the International Journal on Wireless & Optical Communications. He has served as the
TPC member and Session Chair for a number of conferences, and as a Reviewer
for many prestigious journals such as IEEE T-AP, T-MTT, IEEE-AWPL, MWCL,
IET-MAP, Electronics Letters, etc.

