IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2011

2457

Design of Triple-Frequency Microstrip-Fed
Monopole Antenna Using Defected Ground Structure
Wen-Chung Liu, Senior Member, IEEE, Chao-Ming Wu, and Yang Dai

Abstract—A novel triple-frequency microstrip-fed planar
monopole antenna for multiband operation is proposed and investigated. Defected ground structure (DGS) is used in this antenna,
which has a rectangular patch with dual inverted L-shaped strips
and is fed by a cross-shaped stripline, for achieving additional
resonances and bandwidth enhancements. The designed antenna
2 , and operates over the
has a small overall size of 20 30
frequency ranges, 2.14–2.52 GHz, 2.82–3.74 GHz, and 5.15–6.02
GHz suitable for WLAN 2.4/5.2/5.8 GHz and WiMAX 3.5/5.5 GHz
applications. There is good agreement between the measured and
simulated results. Experimental results show that the antenna
gives monopole-like radiation patterns and good antenna gains
over the operating bands. In addition, effects of both the length
of the protrudent strips and the dimensions of the DGS for this
design on the electromagnetic performance are examined and
discussed in detail.

mm

Index Terms—Defected ground structure, monopole antenna,
multi-band, triple-frequency, WiMAX, WLAN.

I. INTRODUCTION
ECENTLY, the demand for the design of an antenna
with triple- or multiband operation has increased since
such an antenna is vital for integrating more than one communication standards in a single compact system to effectively
promote the portability of a modern personal communication
system. For this demand, the developed antenna must not only
be with a triple/multiband operation but also have a simple
structure, compact size, and easy integration with the circuit.
Among the known triple/multiband antenna prototypes, the
planar monopole antenna with various structures has become
a familiar candidate because of its attractive characteristics
including low profile and weight, low cost, and versatile
structure for exciting wide impedance bandwidth, dual- or
multiresonance mode, and desirable radiation characteristics.
However, the difficulty in designing antenna challenges engineers when the size of the antenna reduces and the number of
operating frequency bands increases. So far, for size reduction,
bandwidth enhancement, and resonance-mode increment, numerous monopole antennas have been proposed by employing

R

Manuscript received November 22, 2009; revised February 26, 2010; accepted November 29, 2010. Date of publication May 10, 2011; date of current
version July 07, 2011. This work was supported by the National Science Council
of the Republic of China under Grant NSC 99-2221-E-150-029.
W.-C. Liu and C.-M. Wu are with the Department of Aeronautical Engineering, National Formosa University, Taiwan, R.O.C. (e-mail: wencliu@nfu.
edu.tw).
Y. Dai is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, National University
of Tainan, Taiwan, R.O.C.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TAP.2011.2152315

various promising feed structures such as the probe [1]–[5],
the microstrip [6]–[9], and the coplanar waveguide (CPW)
[10]–[14]. In these presented monopole antennas, a large solid
ground plane having the shape of a square, rectangle, circle, or
ellipse is usually adopted. Different from this, a notable ground
structure named defected ground structure (DFG) has recently
been investigated and found to be a simple and effective method
to reduce the antenna size as well as excite additional resonance
modes [15]–[18].
In this paper, a small and low-profile microstrip-fed
monopole antenna for triple-frequency operation is proposed. The radiating element was modified by loading it with
protrudent strips and feeding it with a cross-shaped stripline. In
addition, unlike the conventional microstrip-fed antenna prototype using a solid ground plane, in this design the ground was
cut out by shaped slots and thus forms a DGS. The above design
skills are introduced to approach excitation of triple resonant
modes accompanied with good impedance bandwidths over the
operating bands. By properly selecting the dimensions of the
proposed antenna, good triple-broad impedance bandwidths
and radiation characteristics suitable for two multiband wireless
communication systems such as the wireless local-area network
(WLAN) 2.4/5.2/5.8 GHz and the worldwide interoperability
for microwave access (WiMAX) 3.5/5.5 GHz operations can be
achieved. In addition, with the DGS, the proposed antenna can
avoid a large surface-wave loss and thus decrease its impact
on the coupling effect when it is used as an array element.
The antenna configuration and simulated data as well as the
constructed prototype and measured data will be carefully
examined and discussed in Sections II and III.
II. ANTENNA DESIGN AND SIMULATION
The schematic configuration of the proposed microstrip-fed
planar monopole antenna with defected ground structure (DGS)
for triple-frequency operation is shown in Fig. 1. For the design
studied here, the radiator and ground plane are etched on the
opposite sides of a printed-circuit board (PCB) with a dielectric
constant of 4.4 and substrate thickness of 1.6 mm.
A cross-shaped stripline, which comprises both the vertical
and
,
and horizontal strips with dimensions of
respectively, and a distance of
between the horizontal strip
and the feed point, is used for feeding the radiator. The basis
of the radiator is a rectangular patch, which has the dimensions
and width
, and is protruded with two inverted
of length
L-shaped strips from the patch’s upper two sides. Each of the
two strips comprises both the vertical and horizontal strips with
and
, respectively. As for the
dimensions of
ground plane, unlike the general use of a solid rectangular plane
for a microstrip-fed antenna, it is defected by two equal-shaped

0018-926X/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE

2458

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2011

TABLE I
OPTIMAL GEOMETRICAL PARAMETERS OF THE PROPOSED
TRIPLE-FREQUENCY MONOPOLE ANTENNA

Fig. 1. Schematic configuration of the proposed triple-frequency monopole antenna with defected ground structure.

Fig. 2. Simulated return loss against frequency for the proposed antenna with/
without DGS, protrudent strips and cross-shaped feedline.

slots, which were appropriately embedded from the ground’s
left and right sides. These slots were introduced to increase
the excitation of resonant modes and improve the impedance
matching condition for the proposed antenna. The overall size
, and each of the embedded slots has
of the ground is
as well as a horizontal section
a vertical section of
. Meanwhile, the slot is etched with a distance of
of
from the bottom of the ground and its vertical section has a
distance of
from the ground side edge.
The electromagnetic solver, Ansoft HFSS, was used to numerically investigate and optimize the proposed antenna configuration. Fig. 2, trace (i), shows the simulated return loss of
the proposed antenna with the optimized parameters as listed in
Table I. Obviously, the simulation results show three resonant
bands at frequencies of 2.26, 3.6, and 5.3 GHz with bandwidths,
defined for 10-dB return loss, of about 380 MHz (2.13–2.51
GHz), 570 MHz (3.26–3.83 GHz), and 880 MHz (5.03–5.91
GHz), respectively, corresponding to an impedance bandwidth
of 17%, 16% and 17% with respect to the appropriate resonant frequencies over the three operating bands. Apparently, the
above obtained bandwidths simultaneously cover the WLAN

Fig. 3. Simulated results of the surface current distributions for the proposed
triple-frequency monopole antenna studied in Fig. 2 at (a) 2.26, (b) 3.6, and
(c) 5.3 GHz.

standards in the 2.4/5.2/5.8 GHz bands and the WiMAX standards in the 3.5/5.5 GHz bands. To further examine the appropriate impedance matching condition caused from addition of
the DGS, the protrudent strips, or the cross-shaped feedline, the
return loss for the proposed optimal design (case (i)) but without
using the DGS, without having the protrudent strips, or without
the horizontal strip for the feedline, which are denoted as curves
(ii), (iii), and (iv), respectively, are also analyzed and presented

LIU et al.: DESIGN OF TRIPLE-FREQUENCY MICROSTRIP-FED MONOPOLE ANTENNA USING DEFECTED GROUND STRUCTURE

W

Fig. 4. Simulated return loss against frequency for the proposed triple-fre; other parameters are the same
quency monopole antenna with various
as listed in Table I.

in Fig. 2. Note that in these cases all the unmentioned dimensions are the same as listed in Table I. For the case without using
solid ground plane for the
the DGS (i.e., using the 20 30
proposed antenna), a worse matching condition appears over the
frequency band, while a resonant mode seems to form at about
3.6 GHz. It is the fundamental mode excited by the radiator of
the rectangular patch loaded with the protrudent strips since the
one-quarter wavelength when operating at 3.6 GHz (i.e., about
21 mm) is almost the same as the electric length along the side
of the radiator. As for the case of the radiating patch without
having the two protrudent inverted L-shaped strips (curve (iii)),
the matching condition is still poor across the full band. However, two modes resonating at 2.3 and 5.04 GHz, respectively,
become forming and without seeing the second resonant mode.
This indicates that inclusion of the two inverted L-shaped strips
in the proposed design will not only significantly improve the
impedance matching conditions for the lowest and highest bands
but also can excite an additional resonance at the second band.
Finally, if we remove the horizontal strip from the cross-shaped
feedline (curve (iv)), though the triple-resonance situation is almost not affected, the matching condition of the highest resonance becomes worse. For further examining the above excitation mechanism of the proposed antenna, the excited surface
current distributions, obtained from the HFSS simulation, on
both the radiator and the ground for the optimally designed antenna, as presented in Fig. 2, was studied. Fig. 3 shows the results for the three resonant frequencies at 2.26, 3.6, and 5.3 GHz.
Obviously, for the lowest band excitation (2.26 GHz band), a
large surface current density is observed along the central longitude portion of the DGS, whereas for the second-(3.6 GHz band)
and the highest-band (5.3 GHz band) excitations, the current
distribution becomes more concentrated along the protrudent
strips and cross-shaped feedline, respectively. According to the
observed phenomena in current distribution on the proposed antenna when operating at the three bands, we investigated the influence of the related geometrical dimensions on the impedance

2459

L

Fig. 5. Simulated return loss against frequency for the proposed triple-fre; other parameters are the same as
quency monopole antenna with various
listed in Table I.

L

Fig. 6. Simulated return loss against frequency for the proposed triple-fre; other parameters are the same as
quency monopole antenna with various
listed in Table I.

matching condition of the three resonant modes. First, the effect of the DGS to the matching condition at the highest operating band is studied. Fig. 4 presents the simulated results of
, 8, and 8.5
the proposed antenna with slot width
mm for the defected ground. We found that the lowest resonant
mode is shifted toward the higher frequency band when
increases, whereas the two higher resonant modes are slightly
affected. As for the second resonant mode, according to the current distribution shown in Fig. 3(b), it has been shown that large
current density is concentrated on the radiator. Therefore, this
of the inverted L-shaped
was verified by adjusting the length
strip to be the values of 2, 3, 5, and 7 mm, and Fig. 5 gives
is the obtained
the simulated results. Note that
optimal case. Obviously, for this design, varying the length of
the patch’s protrudent strip, as excepted, does not significantly
change the triple-resonant mode but does shift the frequency of
the second resonance mode. The second resonant mode moves

2460

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2011

W

Fig. 7. Simulated return loss against frequency for the proposed triple-fre; other parameters are the same
quency monopole antenna with various
as listed in Table I.

toward lower frequency band with
increasing because the
effective electric length along the radiator is lengthened when
increases, whereas both the lowest and the highest dominant modes are only slightly affected. Considering the third
(highest) resonant mode from the current distribution on the antenna, as shown in Fig. 3(c), a large current density was observed
along both the cross-shaped feedline, especially on the horizontal strip, and the appropriate ground plane on the opposite
side of the substrate. Thus, the tuning effect of strip length
of the cross-shaped feedline on the impedance matching condition is examined and shown in Fig. 6. The varying dimensions of
are 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 mm. Here, the case of
represents that the proposed antenna is fed by a straight microstrip
instead of a cross-shaped stripline. Obviously, varying the strip
would seriously affect the highest operation band
length
impedance matching, whereas less change is seen for the first
and second operation bands. Another parameter that may affect
. Fig. 7 presents the
the highest resonance is the slot width
simulated results of return loss against the frequency of the pro, 1.5, 2 and 2.5 mm. Note that the
posed antenna with
means the slot of
does not exist.
case of
The third (highest) resonant mode is clearly found to move toward the lower frequency band if the ground is cut with this
, the lowest resonant freslot. With an increase in the width
quency of the third mode decreases, whereas those of the other
two modes are almost unchanged. The above analyzed results
are very much in accordance with that observed from the current distributions on the antenna and also very vital for designing
such an antenna to obtain the desired triple-frequency bands.
III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The prototype of the proposed antenna with optimal dimensions, as listed in Table I and depicted as curve (i) in Fig. 2,
was constructed and experimentally investigated. The return
loss against frequency for this triple-frequency antenna was
measured by using the Agilent E5071C vector network analyzer

Fig. 8. Measured and simulated return loss against frequency for the proposed
triple-frequency monopole antenna.

TABLE II
SIMULATED AND MEASURED IMPEDANCE BANDWIDTHS OF THE PROPOSED
TRIPLE-FREQUENCY MONOPOLE ANTENNA

and is presented in Fig. 8. For comparison, the simulated results
are also plotted in this figure. Obviously, three resonant modes
at frequencies of 2.31, 3.42, and 5.44 GHz were also obtained.
The measured impedance bandwidths are about 380 MHz
(2.14–2.52 GHz), 920 MHz (2.82–3.74 GHz), and 870 MHz
(5.15–6.02 GHz), corresponding to an impedance bandwidth
of 16%, 27%, and 16% with respect to the appropriate resonant
frequencies over the three operating bands. For comparison,
Table II lists the related simulated and measured data. Reasonable agreement between the simulation and the measurement is
at the lowest
achieved beyond a frequency deviation of
resonant frequencies of the triple operating bands. However,
when we took into account the effects of the SMA connector as
well as the connecting cable, by which the antenna was fed, in
HFSS simulation, such a frequency shift could not be improved.
Contrarily, the frequency deviations at the two higher bands
get larger. The difference may therefore be attributed to the
mismatching between the connector and the antenna feeder.
The radiation characteristics such as radiation pattern, efficiency, directivity, and peak gain across the three operating
bands for the proposed antenna have also been measured
in a far-field range anechoic chamber with dimensions of
and a three-dimensional rotator. Fig. 9 presents the measured radiation patterns including
and horizontal
polarizations in the
the vertical
azimuthal direction ( - plane) and the elevation direction ( and - planes) when operating at 2.45, 3.5, 5.25 and 5.75 GHz

LIU et al.: DESIGN OF TRIPLE-FREQUENCY MICROSTRIP-FED MONOPOLE ANTENNA USING DEFECTED GROUND STRUCTURE

Fig. 9. Measured radiation patterns for the proposed triple-frequency monopole antenna. (E : x x x
and (d) 5.75 GHz.

for WLAN and WiMAX applications. Because of the symmetry
in structure, rather symmetrical radiation patterns are seen in
the - and - planes as depicted in the plots. In addition, very
monopole-like radiation patterns with nearly omnidirectional
radiation in the azimuthal plane and nearly conical patterns in
the elevation planes are observed. In addition, it is also found
and
components of the patterns in both that the

2461

; E : 000) at (a) 2.45 GHz, (b) 3.5 GHz, (c) 5.25 GHz,

and - planes for operating at 2.45 and 3.5 GHz are seemed
to be more comparable than those operating at 5.25 and 5.75
GHz. This electromagnetic phenomenon can be ascribed to
the more horizontal components of the surface current on the
antenna when operating at 2.45 and 3.5 GHz than at 5.25 and
5.75 GHz, as shown in Fig. 3. Also note that measurements at
other operating frequencies across the bandwidth of each band

2462

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2011

respectively, across the triple bands. Agreement between the
measurement and simulation seems well beyond a difference
over the highest frequency band.
of
IV. CONCLUSION
A novel microstrip-fed antenna design based on the patch
monopole for a triple-frequency operation has been presented
with simulated and measured results. With the skills of defecting the ground plane, protruding the patch with dual
protrudent strips, and feeding the patch with a cross-shaped
stripline, the proposed antenna can excite triple-resonances and
has a suitable radiation performance to cater to the operation
requirements of both the 2.4/5.2/5.8 GHz WLAN and the
3.5/5.5 GHz WiMAX communication systems. The antenna
prototype has been constructed and measured, and shown to
match well with the numerical prediction. Also, the effects of
existences of the DGS, the prudent strips, and the cross-shaped
stripline, and varying the dimensions of these structures on the
antenna resonant frequencies and impedance bandwidths have
been presented.
REFERENCES

Fig. 10. Measured and simulated (a) directivity and radiation efficiency,
and (b) peak gain across operating bands for the proposed triple-frequency
monopole antenna.

show radiation patterns similar to those plotted here. Finally,
Fig. 10 shows the measured and simulated radiation efficiency,
directivity and peak gain of the proposed design for frequencies
across the triple operating bands. The average efficiencies
for the three bands are about 50, 58, and 71%, respectively,
in measurement, whereas 60, 62, and 74%, respectively, in
simulation. For directivity, the measured average values are
5.5, 4.8, and 4.5 dB, whereas the simulated results are 4.7, 4.1,
and 3.8 dB, respectively, over the three frequency bands. It
indicates that as the operating band gets higher, the efficiency
increases while the directivity decreases. The reason could be
that when operating at the lower frequency, the current on the
antenna is more in-phase and concentrated in the same direction
to thus make a higher directivity. The peak antenna gains were
measured by applying the gain comparison method, in which
a precalibrated standard gain antenna is used to determine the
absolute gain of the antenna under test, and shown in Fig. 10(b).
The ranges of measured gains are about 2.2–2.6, 2.1–2.6, and
2.5–3.4 dBi with an average value of 2.46, 2.45, and 3.0 dBi,

[1] Y. JoongHan, “Fabrication and measurement of modified spiral-patch
antenna for use as a triple-band (2.4 GHz/5 GHz) antenna,” Microw.
Opt. Technol. Lett., vol. 48, no. 7, pp. 1275–1279, 2006.
[2] J. Costantine, K. Y. Kabalan, A. El-Hajj, and M. Rammal, “New multiband microstrip antenna design for wireless communications,” IEEE
Trans. Antennas Propag. Mag., vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 181–186, 2007.
[3] S. C. Kim, S. H. Lee, and Y. S. Kim, “Multi-band monopole antenna
using meander structure for handheld terminals,” Electron. Lett., vol.
44, no. 5, pp. 331–332, 2008.
[4] H. Wang and M. Zheng, “Triple-band wireless local area network
monopole antenna,” IET Microw. Antennas Propag., vol. 2, no. 4, pp.
367–372, 2008.
[5] C. H. See, R. A. Abd-Alhameed, P. S. Excell, N. J. McEwan, and J. G.
Gardiner, “Internal triple-band folded planar antenna design for third
generation mobile handsets,” IET Microw. Antennas Propag., vol. 2,
no. 7, pp. 718–724, 2008.
[6] H. C. Go and Y. W. Jang, “Multi-band modified fork-shaped microstrip
monopole antenna with ground plane including dual-triangle portion,”
Electron. Lett., vol. 40, no. 10, pp. 575–577, 2004.
[7] K. Seol, J. Jung, and J. Choi, “Multi-band monopole antenna with inverted U-shaped parasitic plane,” Electron. Lett., vol. 42, no. 15, pp.
844–845, 2006.
[8] C. M. Wu, C. N. Chiu, and C. K. Hsu, “A new nonuniform meandered
and fork-type grounded antenna for triple-band WLAN applications,”
IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 346–348, 2006.
[9] W. C. Liu, M. Ghavami, and W. C. Chung, “Triple-frequency meandered monopole antenna with shorted parasitic strips for wireless application,” IET Microw. Antennas Propag., vol. 3, no. 7, pp. 1110–1117,
2009.
[10] W. C. Liu, “Design of a multiband CPW-fed monopole antenna
using a particle swarm optimization approach,” IEEE Trans. Antennas
Propag., vol. 53, no. 10, pp. 3273–3279, 2005.
[11] W. S. Chen and Y. H. Yu, “Compact design of T-type monopole antenna with asymmetrical ground plane for WLAN/WiMAX applications,” Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett., vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 515–519, 2008.
[12] Y. Jee and Y. M. Seo, “Triple-band CPW-fed compact monopole
antennas for GSM/PCS/DCS/WCDMA applications,” Electron. Lett.,
vol. 45, no. 9, pp. 446–448, 2009.
[13] S. Chaimool and K. L. Chung, “CPW-fed mirrored-L monopole antenna with distinct triple bands for WiFi and WiMAX applications,”
Electron. Lett., vol. 45, no. 18, pp. 928–929, 2009.
[14] S. Xiaodi, “Small CPW-fed triple band microstrip monopole antenna
for WLAN applications,” Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett., vol. 51, no. 3,
pp. 747–749, 2009.
[15] J. P. Thakur and J. S. Park, “An advance design approach for circular
polarization of the microstrip antenna with unbalance DGS feedlines,”
IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 101–103, 2006.

LIU et al.: DESIGN OF TRIPLE-FREQUENCY MICROSTRIP-FED MONOPOLE ANTENNA USING DEFECTED GROUND STRUCTURE

[16] M. A. Antoniades and G. V. Eleftheriades, “A compact multiband
monopole antenna with a defected ground plane,” IEEE Antennas
Wirel. Propag. Lett., vol. 7, pp. 652–655, 2008.
[17] K. H. Chiang and K. W. Tam, “Microstrip monopole mntenna with
enhanced bandwidth using defected ground structure,” IEEE Antennas
Wirel. Propag. Lett., vol. 7, pp. 532–535, 2008.
[18] D. Nashaat, H. A. Elsadek, E. Abdallah, H. Elhenawy, and M. F.
Iskander, “Multiband and miniaturized inset feed microstrip patch
antenna using multiple spiral-shaped defect ground structure (DGS),”
in Proc. IEEE AP-S Int. Symp., Jun. 2009, pp. 1–4.
Wen-Chung Liu (S’89–M’02–SM’06) was born in
Changhua, Taiwan, R.O.C., in 1964. He received the
B.S. degree in electronic engineering from Tamkang
University, Tamsul, Taiwan, in 1986, the M.Sc. in nuclear engineering from National Tsinghua University,
Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 1988, and the Ph.D. in electrical
engineering and electronics from Liverpool University, Liverpool, U.K., in 1999.
From 1990 to 2000, he was a Lecturer and then an
Associate Professor in the Department of Electronic
Engineering, Chien-Kuo Institute of Technology,
Changhua, Taiwan. In 2000, he joined the Department of Aeronautical Engineering, National Formosa University, Yunlin, Taiwan, R.O.C., where he is
currently a Professor. From August 2007 to January 2008, he was a Visiting
Professor in the Department of Electronic Engineering, The King’s College
London. He received the Outstanding Research Award from National Formosa
University in 2010. His major research areas of interest are in NVIS antenna,
printed antenna, and application of optimization technique in antenna design.
Prof. Liu is listed in Who’s Who in Asia, Who’s Who in Engineering and
Science, and Who’s Who in the World.

2463

Chao-Ming Wu received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees
in electrical engineering from National Cheng-Kung
University, Tainan, Taiwan, R.O.C., in 1989 and
1995, respectively.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the
Department of Aeronautical Engineering, National
Formosa University, Yunlin, Taiwan, R.O.C. His
research interests include digital communication,
antenna design, and data hiding.

Yang Dai was born in Taichung, Taiwan, R.O.C., in
1987. He received the B.S. degree in aeronautical engineering from National Formosa University, Yunlin,
Taiwan, R.O.C., in 2010. He is currently working toward the M.S. degree at the Department of Electrical
Engineering, National University of Tainan, Taiwan,
R.O.C.
His main research interests are in printed antenna
design and RF circuit design.

