2538

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2011

Harmonic Beamforming in Time-Modulated
Linear Arrays
Lorenzo Poli, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Paolo Rocca, Member, IEEE, Giacomo Oliveri, Member, IEEE,
and Andrea Massa, Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, the synthesis of simultaneous multibeams through time-modulated linear arrays is studied. Unlike
classical phased arrays where the antenna aperture is usually
shared to generate multiple beams, the periodic on-off sequences
controlling the static excitations are properly defined by means of
an optimization strategy based on the Particle Swarm algorithm to
afford desired multiple patterns at harmonic frequencies to make
practical application of these harmonic beams which are typically
regarded as an undesirable effect in time-modulated arrays. The
synthesis of simultaneous broadside sum and difference patterns,
flat-top and narrow beam patterns, and steered multibeams is enabled as assessed by a set of selected results reported and discussed
to show the potentialities of the proposed method. Comparisons
with previously published results are reported, as well.
Index Terms—Harmonic beams, particle swarm optimization,
time-modulated linear arrays.

I. INTRODUCTION
ULTIBEAM antennas are radiating systems devoted
to generate multiple patterns from the same aperture.
Originally, they were used for surveillance and tracking in
radar systems [1], but multiple beam antennas are recently
also playing a key role in communication systems installed
on satellites and ground stations [2]. As for radars, widebeam
patterns are required for search and detection functions, while
narrow beams with high angular resolution capabilities are
needed for tracking purposes. On the other hand, the advantages of using multiple beams for communication purposes lie
in the possibility to manage more communications/services
from different spatial directions and to operate over multiple
frequency bands. Moreover, patterns with different shapes can
be used in adaptive systems to maintain reliable wireless links
in the presence of jammers or interference signals or to properly
address different requests of service.
Two different solutions have been principally considered in
designing multibeam antennas. The former considers reflector
antennas, either parabolic structures or reflectarrays, where the

M

Manuscript received January 31, 2010; revised October 29, 2010; accepted
November 26, 2010. Date of publication May 10, 2011; date of current version
July 07, 2011. This work supported in part by the Italian National Project: Wireless multiplatform MIMO Active access networks for QoS-demanding multimedia delivery (WORLD), under Grant 2007R989S.
The authors are with the Department of Information Engineering and
Computer Science, University of Trento, Povo 38050 Trento, Italy (e-mail:
lorenzo.poli@disi.unitn.it; paolo.rocca@disi.unitn.it; giacomo.oliveri@disi.
unitn.it; andrea.massa@ing.unitn.it).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TAP.2011.2152323

primary source is composed by multiple feeds whose output signals can be shared between adjacent patterns to reduce the costs
and the complexity of the feeding structure [1]. The other exploits antenna arrays and, nowadays, is the preferred solution
since it allows a direct control of the illumination on the aperture
and an electronic beam steering. Moreover, array architectures
generally have a lighter weight and they can be made conformal.
Dealing with arrays, many strategies have been proposed to
synthesize switchable [3] and reconfigurable arrays [4]–[6]. The
excitations of switchable arrays are selected among a list of
predetermined configurations, whereas the excitations are adaptively controlled (usually only the phase weights to simplify the
hardware implementation) in reconfigurable arrays. Since the
whole set of array elements is optimized to generate each pattern, high radiation performances can be yielded even though
only one beam can be generated at each time instant. To avoid
this drawback, other solutions have been proposed to simultaneously radiate multiple patterns. Sub-arrayed antennas as well
as interleaved arrays have proved to work properly in both radar
[7]–[10] and biomedical [11], [12] applications.
Another approach for the simultaneous generation of multiple-patterns is based on time-modulation (TM). Although its
theoretical formulation [13] and the first practical implementations to obtain average ultra-low sidelobe patterns [14] date back
to the 1960s, there is nowadays a renewed and growing interest
towards such a solution as confirmed by the number of contributions in the reference literature on antennas as well as the applications where timed arrays have been successfully applied.
The main limitation of these systems is related to the presence of
the sideband radiation (SR) due to the periodic on-off commutations of the RF switches of the beam forming network. However,
optimization strategies based on evolutionary algorithms (e.g.,
differential evolution [15], simulated annealing [16], genetic algorithms [17], and particle swarm optimizer [18]) have recently
provided efficient switching schemes to properly address such
an issue. It is also worth noting that the theory of TM arrays has
been recently revised and formalized in a rigorous mathematical fashion [19], [20], [21] in order to derive analytical relationships for exactly quantifying the power dispersions associated
to the SR. For completeness, let us consider that further studies
have dealt with the evaluation of the directivity and gain [22]
and their optimization [23]. As for the applications, time-modulated arrays have been employed to generate ultra-low sidelobe patterns for the suppression of interferences and clutters
[14] and shaped beams [24] with reduced dynamic range ratios.
The synthesis of pulse doppler radars [25] and compromise patterns for monopulse radars [26] has been also analyzed, but experimental prototypes have been implemented [17], [27] in a

0018-926X/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE

POLI et al.: HARMONIC BEAMFORMING IN TIME-MODULATED LINEAR ARRAYS

few cases and further researches are expected in such a framework. In these works, the harmonic beams are power losses to
be minimized, while other approaches consider a different point
of view by exploiting the generation of simultaneous patterns at
different sidebands. More specifically, patterns with the same
shape generated at different harmonics and pointing at different
angular directions have been used in radar systems to enable
the electronic beam scanning by means of a progressive on-off
switching of the array elements [28]. The same concept has
been recently revisited in [29] and extended to the estimation
of the directions of arrival [30]. Accurate radar localization and
tracking capabilities have been assessed in [31] by synthesizing
a two-element TM array providing a monopulse-like behavior
where two beams (one with a peak and another with a null along
the broadside direction) have been generated at the central and
first harmonic, respectively.
In this paper, an optimization-based technique for the synthesis of TM linear arrays able to generate multiple beams at different sidebands with different shapes and features is presented.
Such a strategy can be used for multi-function radars devoted to
surveillance and security purposes [28], [31] as well as for selectively receiving different signals at different sidebands. Moreover, the diversity of different beam patterns with various shapes
can be of interest in mobile communications for designing innovative base stations as well as in multiple-input multiple-output
(MIMO) systems. The harmonic beamforming is obtained by
determining the periodic on-off time sequence that modulates
the static excitations of the array by considering an iterative optimization evolving according to the particle swarm (PS) strategy
[32]. For a numerical assessment of the proposed approach, simultaneous broadside sum and difference patterns, flat-top and
narrow beams, as well as steered multibeams are synthesized.
The paper is organized as follows. The problem is mathematically formulated in Section II where the synthesis procedure
is described, as well. Selected results from a set of numerical
experiments are presented (Section III) to point out the potentialities of the proposed multibeam strategy. Eventually, some
conclusions are drawn (Section IV).
II. MATHEMATICAL FORMULATION
Let us consider a time-modulated linear antenna array
(TMLA) where a set of
radio-frequency switches is
used to modulate the static excitations of amplitudes
,
, and phases
,
. Such
a linear arrangement of
isotropic sources displaced along
the axis at the positions ,
, radiates the
following field [19]

(1)

2539

is the central angular frequency,
is the
where
free-space wavenumber, being the speed of light in vacuum,
and denotes the angular direction. The RF switches are con,
,
trolled by means of digital signals,
of period mathematically modeled as rectangular pulse funcwithin the normalized (with retions with values
,
being
spect to ) duration
the switch-on (raise) and switch-off (fall) time instants, respectively, and
for the remaining part of the modulation
period. Because of the time periodicity, each pulse function can
,
be expanded into a Fourier series,
where
and the expansion coefficients are equal to
. Accordingly, (1) can
be rewritten as an (ideally) infinite number of radiated patterns
from
shifted of

(2)
whose

th

term

is

given by
,
being the equivalent excitation. In
particular, the pattern at the central frequency is given by
and the corresponding
Fourier coefficients are real and equal to
,
. Otherwise, those at the harmonic
frequencies
are complex and given by [23] (3), shown
at the bottom of the page.
It follows that to synthesize desired patterns at the central
frequency
and at its harmonics
the set of the
pulse durations,
, and the values
of the switch-on instants,
, can be
properly optimized. Whether necessary, the sets of amplitudes,
, and phases,
, of the static excitations can be also properly
tuned.
However, it is worthwhile to point out that without suitable
countermeasures the power associated to the SR decreases as
the harmonic index increases [19] and only the first harmonic
modes
are expected to generate “useful” patterns. In order to overcome this drawback in view of multiple
harmonic beams, the following PS-based optimization procedure is proposed:
• Definition of the Static Excitations— and
The values of the static excitations are generally a-priori
defined according to the following motivations depending
on the problem at hand. The use of unitary amplitude
weights (i.e.,
,
) is generally
preferred in order to simplify the complexity of the beam

.

(3)

2540

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2011

forming network [16], [17] and to avoid additional amplifiers/attenuators as shown in synthesizing ultra-low
sidelobe patterns [14], [33] with a reduced dynamic range.
Differently, non-uniform (complex) weights can be used
to generate a desired quiescent (without time-modulating
the element excitations) pattern at the central frequency
. From an algorithmic point of view, a smaller
number of control variables reduces the computational
burden required by the optimization process. Otherwise,
a better matching of the synthesized solutions with the
user-defined requirements can be achieved when more
degrees-of-freedom are available;
• Definition of the TM Pulse Sequence— and
The parameters modeling the rectangular digital signals,
namely the pulse durations, , and the switch-on instants, ,
are determined by minimizing the cost function, , aimed
at enforcing the desired patterns both at the central fre, and at the first sideband (upper and
quency,
lower) radiations,
,

(4)

where
is the set of unknown quantities (i.e.,
) and is the Heaviside
function. Moreover,
denotes the target/desired value
along the direction of the sidelobe level
,
the first null beamwidth
, the sideband level
, and the ripple level
of the
th harmonic pattern. The same notation holds true for the
. Furthermore,
is a real and
current value
positive coefficient weighting each term of the cost function according to the problem requirements.
In order to minimize (4), a standard PS optimization algorithm [32] is used by iteratively ( being the iteration index,
) applying the following updating equations

(5)

is the inertial weight coefficient and
and
where
are the cognitive and social acceleration coefficients,
respectively. Moreover,
and
are uniformly-distributed random variables. As far as the swarm is concerned,
is the index of the th particle,
is the personal best
particle, while
is
the global best of the whole swarm at the th iteration.

0

N

d =
jhj

Fig. 1. 6 1 configuration ( = 16, =
2)—optimized (a) pulse sequence and (b) relative power patterns at the central frequency ( = 0—sum
= 1—difference pattern).
pattern) and at the fundamental frequency (

h

III. NUMERICAL RESULTS
The first experiment deals with the generation of a sum pattern at the central frequency and a difference pattern at the funuseful in monopulse radars for
damental one
search-and-track purposes. A linear array with
equally,
,
spaced elements located at
being the inter-element distance, is the reference architecture. Amplitude-only static excitations with unitary gains
and
,
)
have been chosen (i.e.,
to yield a simple beamforming network. According to the guidelines in [31], here applied to the synthesis of arrays with more
than two elements [34], it is enough to energize the two halves of
in the time pulse sequence to obtain
the array with a shift of
a pattern with a null on boresight. Therefore, the pulse durations
,
,
have been set to
and only half elements of the TM array have been optimized by
minimizing (4) with
and
,
,
1, the reference values being fixed to
,
, and
. Moreover, the
initial configuration of the unknowns has been set to afford a
at
.
Dolph-Chebyshev pattern with
Fig. 1(a) shows the configuration of the switch-on times obof the PS procedure carried
tained after

POLI et al.: HARMONIC BEAMFORMING IN TIME-MODULATED LINEAR ARRAYS

2541

TABLE I
Sum-Difference Configurations (
,

N = 16 d = =2)—PATTERN INDEXES

601
jhj = 1

N = 16 d = =2

Fig. 3.
configuration (
,
)—relative power patterns at
the central frequency (
—sum pattern) and at the fundamental frequency
—difference pattern) synthesized with the PS optimization and in [34].
(

601

N = 16 d = =2

Fig. 2.
configuration (
,
)—percentage of the individual power associated to the harmonic radiations.

out with a swarm of
and the control paramand
eters set to a standard configuration [23]:
. The radiated patterns are given in Fig. 1(b) for
and
, while the corresponding pattern indexes are reported in Table I (
configuration). As expected, most of
the power is radiated at the central frequency and at the funand
damental one with a percentage equal to
of the total power (
being the power associated to the pattern at the th harmonic radiation), respectively.
Such an outcome is further pointed out in Fig. 2 where the power
content of each pattern up to the 9th harmonic mode is reported.
The amount of power rapidly tends to zero when the harmonic
index grows. For completeness, the solution with the proposed
approach and that in [34] are compared in Fig. 3 to also point
out that an unavoidable trade-off exists. As a matter of fact, if
can be oba more accurate control of the sidelobes for
tained through the PS optimizer, on the other hand, the SLL at
increases with respect to that in [34].
As for the minimization process, Fig. 4 gives an indication of
the optimization process by showing the plot of the cost function
throughout the iterations.
The second experiment still considers the synthesis of sum
and difference patterns, even though now the sum beam is

601

h=0

N = 16 d = =2

Fig. 4.
configuration (
,
)—behavior of the cost
function throughout the optimization process and its the individual terms.

, while the difference one at the central
synthesized at
. Towards this end, the odd symmetry
frequency
of the excitations is enforced to generate a difference beam
,
by adding to the phase values of half array (i.e.,
). The value
has been set to 1
. Moreover,
dB since only one main beam is required at
the thresholds
have been chosen
and all terms of the cost function have been equally weighted.
The optimized switch-on times and the corresponding
and difference
patterns are shown
sum
in Fig. 5(a) and (b), respectively. From the quantitative
configuration), it turns
pattern indexes in Table I (
out that both patterns are quite similar in terms of sidelobe
) and sideband
levels (i.e.,
. Moreover,
and
values
(Fig. 6). Concerning the sideband radiation,
the values of the SBLs of the first 30 harmonic modes of the
solution are reported in Fig. 7(a) and compared with
configuration, as well. Whether for
those of the
the SBLs have similar behaviors, the advantages of the
solution are non-negligible at the fundamental frequency (i.e.,
vs.
—Table I).

2542

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2011

106

N = 16 d = =2
jhj = 1

Fig. 5.
configuration (
,
)—optimized
(a) pulse sequence and (b) relative power patterns at the central frequency
(
—difference pattern) and at the fundamental frequency (
—sum
pattern).

h=0

106

N = 16, d = =2)—relative power patterns of
jhj = 1, 2, 3.

Fig. 6.
configuration (
the sideband radiation for

For completeness, the radiation patterns at
, 3 are
displayed in Fig. 7(b).
The following experiments are concerned with two design solutions suitable for intercepting signals impinging on an array of
elements spaced by
from different angular directions without phase shifters in the array architecture. In the

N = 16, d = =2)—comparison of
SBL when h 2 [1; 30] and (b) the

Fig. 7. Sum-difference configurations (
(a) the behavior of the sideband levels
harmonic patterns radiated at
, 3.

jhj = 2

first example, the approach exploits the guidelines in [28], recently also considered in [29], where the beam steering at the
first harmonic mode is forced by controlling the pulse sequence.
Likewise [29], the pattern is requested to be directed at broadand
are the diside at , while
and
rections of the desired beams at the first upper
lower
sideband, respectively. Towards this purpose,
the cost function has been defined by setting
. Moreover, the reference level of the
and
has been fixed to 20 dB.
secondary lobes at
The PS-optimized solution is summarized in Fig. 8 where
the on-off sequence [Fig. 8(a)] and the corresponding radiated
patterns are shown [Fig. 8(b)]. The indexes in Table II (Harmonic Beam Steering) confirm the effectiveness of the proposed
strategy in yielding a satisfactory solution that fits the user requirements. The possibility to selectively and simultaneously
receive signals from three different directions is the main advantage of such a solution, even though an ad-hoc receiver able
to separate each harmonic component [29] would be necessary.
An alternative solution is presented in Fig. 9 where only one
pattern, characterized by two main beams pointing at
, is generated at the first sideband either at
and not at
or vice versa. Although it is not possible to
distinguish whether the signals impinge from
or
, the

POLI et al.: HARMONIC BEAMFORMING IN TIME-MODULATED LINEAR ARRAYS

N = 16 d = =2
( = 0 )
( = 030 ) h = 01

Fig. 8. Harmonic beam steering (
,
)—optimized
(a) pulse sequence and (b) relative power patterns at the central frequency
[
—broadside beam
] and at the fundamental frequen—steered beam
;
—steered beam
cies [
].

h =0
h = 1
( = 30 )

TABLE II
Harmonic Beam Steering—Double Sum Configuration (
)—PATTERN INDEXES

d = =2

N = 16,

HW implementation is less complex in this case since the received power is collected only at
and
. The
indexes describing the synthesized Double Sum Beam are summarized in Table II where the performances of the Harmonic
Beam Steering solution are also reported for comparison.
The last test case is a representative example aimed at
showing some other potentialities of the proposed approach.
and
More specifically, the synthesis of a flat-top pattern at
of a sum pattern at
is addressed by considering an array

2543

N = 16 d = =2
( = 0 )
 = 630

Fig. 9. Double sum configuration (
,
)—optimized
(a) pulse sequence and (b) relative power patterns at the central frequency
(
—broadside beam
] and at the fundamental frequency
].
—steered beam,
[

h=0
jhj = 1

TABLE III
Flat top and Sum Configuration (
,
)—INITIAL
SETTING [35] FOR THE ITERATIVE OPTIMIZATION

N = 12 d = =2

(k = 0)

of
half-wavelength spaced elements with uniform
,
). The
amplitude weights (i.e.,
phase weights, , and switch-on times, , have been initialized
to afford a flat-top beam as in [35] and their normalized
values are reported in Table III. The synthesis targets have been
fixed to
and
.
The pulse sequence determined with the PS is shown
in Fig. 10(a) together with the synthesized two patterns
[Fig. 10(b)] whose descriptive indexes are reported in

2544

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2011

to avoid, have been profitably exploited to design an antenna
system providing simultaneous multiple patterns. Towards
this purpose, an optimization procedure has been applied to
determine the time-domain descriptors of the digital time sequence that controls the RF switches devoted to implement the
time-modulation of the array. Since the power associated to the
harmonic modes rapidly reduces for higher harmonic modes,
the desired patterns have been synthesized at the central and the
first harmonics. Although further investigations are currently
under development, the results of the numerical assessment
provide a proof that time-modulated arrays are an effective and
reliable architectural solution for those applications requiring a
multiple and simultaneous beamforming.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are grateful to the anonymous reviewers for their
technical comments and suggestions.
REFERENCES

N = 12 d = =2
h =1

Fig. 10. Flat top and sum configuration (
,
)—optimized
(a) pulse sequence and (b) relative power patterns at the central frequency (
—flat-top pattern) and at the fundamental frequency [j j
—sum pattern)].

0

h=

TABLE IV
Flat top and Sum Configuration (
,

N = 12 d = =2)—PATTERN INDEXES

Table IV. As it can be observed, the beams satisfy the design constraints with the level of the secondary lobes equal
,
, and the peak
to
of the sum beam with value
. Moreover,
with a maximum
the flat-top region presents a ripple level
.
oscillation of
IV. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, the synthesis of multiple harmonic beams in
time modulated linear arrays has been addressed. The sideband
radiations arising from the periodic time-modulation of the
static excitations of the array, usually regarded as power losses

[1] I. M. Skolnik, Radar Handbook, 3rd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill,
2008.
[2] C. A. Balanis, Antenna Theory: Analysis and Design, 3rd
ed. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2005.
[3] M. Barba, J. E. Page, J. A. Encinar, and J. R. Montejo-Garai, “A
switchable multiple beam antenna for GSM-UMTS base stations in
planar technology,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 54, no. 11,
pp. 3087–3094, Nov. 2006.
[4] M. Durr, A. Trastoy, and F. Ares, “Multiple-pattern linear antenna arrays with single prefixed amplitude distributions: Modified WoodwardLawson synthesis,” Electron. Lett., vol. 36, no. 16, pp. 1345–1346,
Aug. 2000.
[5] A. Trastoy, Y. Rahmat-Samii, F. Ares, and E. Moreno, “Two-pattern
linear array antenna: Synthesis and analysis of tolerance,” IEE Proc.
Microw. Antennas Propag., vol. 151, no. 2, pp. 127–130, Apr. 2004.
[6] M. Comisso and R. Vescovo, “Multi-beam synthesis with null constraints by phase control for antenna arrays of arbitrary geometry,”
Electron. Lett., vol. 43, no. 7, pp. 374–375, Mar. 2007.
[7] R. L. Haupt, “Interleaved thinned linear arrays,” IEEE Trans. Antennas
Propag., vol. 53, no. 9, pp. 2858–2864, Sep. 2005.
[8] I. E. Lager, C. Trampuz, M. Simeoni, and L. P. Ligthart, “Interleaved
array antennas for FMCW radar applications,” IEEE Trans. Antennas
Propag., vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 2486–2490, Aug. 2009.
[9] G. Oliveri and A. Massa, “Fully-interleaved linear arrays with predictable sidelobes based on almost difference sets,” IET Radar Sonar
Navigat., vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 649–661, 2010.
[10] G. Oliveri, P. Rocca, and A. Massa, “Interleaved linear arrays with
difference sets,” Electron. Lett., vol. 46, no. 5, pp. 323–324, 2010.
[11] A. Austeng and S. Holm, “Sparse 2-D arrays for 3-D phased array
imaging—Design methods,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelect., Freq.
Contr., vol. 49, no. 8, pp. 1073–1086, Aug. 2002.
[12] G. Oliveri and A. Massa, “ADS-based array design for 2D and 3D ultrasound imaging,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelect., Freq. Contr.,
vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 1568–1582, Jul. 2010.
[13] H. E. Shanks and R. W. Bickmore, “Four-dimensional electromagnetic
radiators,” Canad. J. Phys., vol. 37, pp. 263–275, Mar. 1959.
[14] W. H. Kummer, A. T. Villeneuve, T. S. Fong, and F. G. Terrio,
“Ultra-low sidelobes from time-modulated arrays,” IEEE Trans.
Antennas Propag., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 633–639, Jun. 1963.
[15] S. Yang, Y. B. Gan, and A. Qing, “Sideband suppression in time-modulated linear arrays by the differential evolution algorithm,” IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 1, pp. 173–175, 2002.
[16] J. Fondevila, J. C. Brégains, F. Ares, and E. Moreno, “Optimizing uniformly excited linear arrays through time modulation,” IEEE Antennas
Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 3, pp. 298–301, 2004.
[17] S. Yang, Y. B. Gan, A. Qing, and P. K. Tan, “Design of a uniform amplitude time modulated linear array with optimized time sequences,” IEEE
Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 2337–2339, Jul. 2005.
[18] L. Poli, P. Rocca, L. Manica, and A. Massa, “Handling sideband radiations in time-modulated arrays through particle swarm optimization,”
IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 1408–1411, Apr.
2010.

POLI et al.: HARMONIC BEAMFORMING IN TIME-MODULATED LINEAR ARRAYS

[19] J. C. Brégains, J. Fondevila, G. Franceschetti, and F. Ares, “Signal radiation and power losses of time-modulated arrays,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 1799–1804, Jun. 2008.
[20] L. Poli, P. Rocca, L. Manica, and A. Massa, “Pattern synthesis in timemodulated linear arrays through pulse shifting,” IET Microw., Antennas
Propag., vol. 4, no. 9, pp. 1157–1164, 2010.
[21] L. Poli, P. Rocca, L. Manica, and A. Massa, “Time modulated planar
arrays—Analysis and optimization of the sideband radiations,” IET Microw. Antennas Propag., vol. 4, no. 9, pp. 1157–1164, 2010.
[22] S. Yang, Y. B. Gan, and P. K. Tan, “Evaluation of directivity and gain
for time-modulated linear antenna arrays,” Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett.,
vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 167–171, Jul. 2004.
[23] L. Manica, P. Rocca, L. Poli, and A. Massa, “Almost time-independent
performance in time-modulated linear arrays,” IEEE Antennas Wireless
Propag. Lett., vol. 8, pp. 843–846, 2009.
[24] S. Yang, Y. B. Gan, and P. K. Tan, “A new technique for power-pattern
synthesis in time-modulated linear arrays,” IEEE Antennas Wireless
Propag. Lett., vol. 2, pp. 285–287, 2003.
[25] G. Li, S. Yang, and Z. Nie, “A study on the application of time modulated antenna arrays to airborne pulsed doppler radar,” IEEE Trans.
Antennas Propag., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 1579–1583, May 2009.
[26] J. Fondevila, J. C. Brégains, F. Ares, and E. Moreno, “Application of
time modulation in the synthesis of sum and difference patterns by
using linear arrays,” Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett., vol. 48, no. 5, pp.
829–832, May 2006.
[27] A. Tennant and B. Chambers, “Time-switched array analysis of phaseswitched screens,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 57, no. 3, pp.
808–812, Mar. 2009.
[28] H. Shanks, “A new technique for electronic scanning,” IRE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 162–166, Mar. 1961.
[29] G. Li, S. Yang, Y. Chen, and Z. Nie, “A novel electronic beam steering
technique in time modulated antenna arrays,” Progr. Electromagn.
Res., vol. 97, pp. 391–405, 2009.
[30] G. Li, S. Yang, and Z. Nie, “Direction of arrival estimation in time modulated antenna arrays with unidirectional phase center motion,” IEEE
Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 1105–1111, Apr. 2009.
[31] A. Tennant and B. Chambers, “Two-element time-modulated array
with direction-finding properties,” IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag.
Lett., vol. 6, pp. 64–65, 2007.
[32] J. Kennedy, R. C. Eberhart, and Y. Shi, Swarm Intelligence. San
Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 2001.
[33] S. Yang, “Study of low sidelobe time modulated linear antenna arrays
at millimeter-waves,” Int. J. Infrared Milli. Waves, vol. 26, no. 3, pp.
443–456, Mar. 2005.
[34] A. Tennant and B. Chambers, “Control of the harmonic radiation patterns of time-modulated antenna arrays,” presented at the IEEE AP-S
Int. Symp., San Diego, CA, Jul. 5–12, 2008.
[35] Y. U. Kim and R. S. Elliot, “Shaped-pattern synthesis using pure real
distributions,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 36, no. 11, pp.
1645–1649, Nov. 1988.
Lorenzo Poli (S’10) received the M.S. degree in
telecommunication engineering from the University
of Trento, Italy, in 2008.
He is with the International Graduate School
in Information and Communication Technologies,
University of Trento and a member of the ELEDIA
Research Group. His main interests are the synthesis
of the antenna array and electromagnetic inverse
scattering.

2545

Paolo Rocca (M’09) received the B.S., M.S., and
Ph.D. degrees in telecommunications engineering
from the University of Trento, Italy, in 2004, 2005,
and 2009, respectively.
He is with the International Graduate School in
Information and Communication Technologies, University of Trento and a member of the ELEDIA Research Group. His main interests are in the framework of antenna synthesis and design, electromagnetic inverse scattering, and optimization techniques
for electromagnetics.

Giacomo Oliveri (M’09) received the B.S. and M.S.
degrees in telecommunications engineering and the
Ph.D. degree in space sciences and engineering from
the University of Genoa, Italy, in 2003, 2005, and
2009, respectively.
Since 2008, he has been a member of the Electromagnetic Diagnostic Laboratory, University of
Trento, Italy. His research work is mainly focused
on cognitive radio systems, electromagnetic direct
and inverse problems, and antenna array design and
synthesis.

Andrea Massa (M’03) received the “Laurea” degree
in electronic engineering and Ph.D. degree in electronics and computer science from the University of
Genoa, Genoa, Italy, in 1992 and 1996, respectively.
From 1997 to 1999, he was an Assistant Professor
of electromagnetic fields at the Department of
Biophysical and Electronic Engineering, University
of Genoa, teaching the university course of Electromagnetic Fields 1. From 2001 to 2004, he was
an Associate Professor and, since 2005, he has been
a Full Professor of electromagnetic fields at the
University of Trento, where he currently teaches electromagnetic fields, inverse
scattering techniques, antennas and wireless communications, and optimization
techniques. At present, he is the Director of the ELEDIALab, University of
Trento and Deputy Dean of the Faculty of Engineering. His research work since
1992 has been principally on electromagnetic direct and inverse scattering,
microwave imaging, optimization techniques, wave propagation in presence of
nonlinear media, wireless communications and applications of electromagnetic
fields to telecommunications, medicine and biology.
Prof. Massa is a member of the PIERS Technical Committee, the Inter-University Research Center for Interactions Between Electromagnetic Fields and
Biological Systems (ICEmB) and Italian representative in the General Assembly
of the European Microwave Association (EuMA).

