102

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 60, NO. 1, JANUARY 2012

Single, Dual and Tri-Band-Notched Ultrawideband
(UWB) Antennas Using Capacitively Loaded Loop
(CLL) Resonators
Chia-Ching Lin, Associate Member, IEEE, Peng Jin, Member, IEEE, and Richard W. Ziolkowski, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Two compact, printed, ultrawideband (UWB)
monopole antennas with tri-band notched characteristics are
reported. The notched filters are achieved by introducing printed,
electrically small, capacitively-loaded loop (CLL) resonators. The
directly driven elements consist of printed top-loaded CLL-based
microstrip feed lines. By adding three CLL
monopoles and 50
elements close to the feed line, band-notch properties in the
WiMAX (3.3–3.6GHz), lower WLAN (5.15–5.35GHz) and higher
WLAN (5.725–5.825GHz) bands are achieved. Each antenna
system is contained on a
sheet of Rogers Duroid
5880 substrate. One is designed with three additional CLL elements; the other is achieved with only two. Comparisons between
the simulation and measurement results show that these UWB
antennas have broadband matched impedance values and stable
radiation patterns for all radiating frequencies.
Index Terms—Antenna efficiency, antenna pattern, antennas,
metamaterials, ultrawideband (UWB).

I. INTRODUCTION

U

LTRAWIDEBAND (UWB) communication systems
have become an attractive wireless topic since the Federal Communication Commission (FCC) first approved in 2002
the rules for the utilization of the 3.1–10.6 GHz unlicensed band
for commercial UWB communications [1]. The high demands
on such communication systems have stimulated research into
many UWB antenna designs. Nonetheless, antenna designs
for UWB applications face many challenges including their
impedance matching, radiation stability, compact size, low
manufacturing cost and electromagnetic interference (EMI)
problems. The EMI problems are quite serious for UWB systems since there are several other existing narrowband services
which occupy frequency bands within the designated UWB

Manuscript received March 17, 2011; revised June 08, 2011; accepted July
15, 2011. Date of publication September 15, 2011; date of current version
January 05, 2012 This work was supported in part by DARPA Contract
HR0011-05-C-0068 and in part by ONR Contract H940030920902.
C.-C. Lin was with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721-0104 USA. He is now with Ruckus
Wireless, Sunnyvale, CA 94085 USA.
P. Jin was with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721-0104 USA. He is now with Broadcom
Corporation, Irvine, CA 92617-3038 USA.
R. W. Ziolkowski is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721-0104 USA (e-mail: ziolkowski@email.arizona.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TAP.2011.2167947

bandwidth. These include world interoperability for microwave
access (WiMAX) service from 3.3 to 3.6 GHz; wireless local
area network (WLAN) services such as IEEE 802.11a in the
USA (5.15 to 5.35 GHz, 5.725 to 5.825 GHz) and HIPERLAN/2
in Europe (5.15 to 5.35 GHz, 5.47 to 5.725 GHz). To mitigate
any interference with these coexisting systems, it is necessary
to introduce a UWB antenna that has intrinsic filtering properties at their service frequencies. To minimize the footprint
of the antenna system, the signal processing requirements, and
the cost, it is highly desirable for those filters to be intrinsically
handled rather than through any additional external band-stop
filter devices.
There are several methods with which one can achieve a
band-notched UWB antenna. The most popular approach is
to embed different shaped slots in the radiating element or in
its ground plane. Examples include U-shaped, H-shaped or
C-shaped slots [2]–[6]. However, most UWB antennas have
been designed with only one or two notched-frequency bands.
On the other hand, the complimentary split ring resonator
(CSRR) structure, for instance, was proposed recently to reject more than one of the unwanted frequency bands [7]–[9].
Although those designs are low profile, achieve stable radiation patterns, and have constant gain, the lower WLAN band
(5.15–5.35 GHz) was not rejected successfully.
Two tri-band-notched UWB antennas are proposed in this
paper. One design utilizes three electrically small resonators,
each being realized as a capacitively-loaded loop (CLL). The
CLL element was introduced originally to achieve a mu-negative metamaterial that acts as an artificial magnetic conductor
for low profile antenna applications [10]. Each CLL element
has a high-Q characteristic and a compact size, making it a very
suitable candidate for a band-stop filter function. Like the split
ring resonator (SRR) element [11], the CLL element is self-resonant and has a resonance frequency that is determined primarily
by its loop inductance and the capacitances resulting from the
cuts which open the loop. In contrast, the CLL element has a
much simpler, more compact design. It will be demonstrated
that by placing one, two or three CLL elements near the feedline and tuning their sizes, one can control the band-notched frequencies of the radiator, while minimizing their space requirements, to achieve single, dual, and tri-band notched-filter UWB
antennas. The approach is analogous to the filter methods that
introduce various types of metamaterial unit cell elements into
transmission lines [12]. A second design employs a CLL-based
slot element in the top-loaded monopole element and two CLL
elements located along the feedline. It overcomes the tuning

0018-926X/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE

LIN et al.: SINGLE, DUAL AND TRI-BAND-NOTCHED UWB ANTENNAS USING CLL RESONATORS

103

Fig. 2. Comparisons of the measured and simulated VSWR values for the baseline UWB antenna shown in Fig. 1.

Fig. 3. Geometry of the single band-notched UWB antenna. All dimensions
,
,
,
,
are in mm:
,
, and
.

Fig. 1. Geometry of the baseline UWB antenna. (a) top view; (b) bottom view.
,
,
,
,
All dimensions are in mm:
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
, and
.

sensitivities associated with the first design. Comparisons between the ANSOFT finite element method (FEM) based high
frequency structure simulation (HFSS, v. 12.1) results and experiments for both designs show very good agreement. Initial
results from these investigations were reported in [13].
II. UWB ANTENNAS WITH AND WITHOUT BAND-NOTCHED
FILTERS
A. Baseline UWB Design
Fig. 1(a) and 1(b) show the top and bottom views of the
baseline design. It is a top-loaded CLL-based UWB antenna
that is implemented with Rogers Duroid 5880 board material.
The latter has a relative permittivity
, loss tangent
, 0.5 oz electrodeposited copper (17
thickness) and 31 mil thickness. Its overall size is
; it is fed by a microstrip line
to achieve a 50 input impedance when connected by an SMA

connector to the source. The SMA connector is included in the
HFSS model. The radiating portion of the antenna associated
with the microstrip feed line is on one side (front) of the board;
the conducting ground plane is on the other (back) side. Both the
radiating monopole and the ground plane have curved shapes to
help tailor the input impedance to a 50 source, to increase the
radiation efficiency and to help produce smooth transitions from
one resonant mode to another. This characteristic ensures a good
impedance match (i.e.,
) over the entire UWB frequency range, 3.1–10.6 GHz. The copper thickness and realistic
values of its conductivity were included. The final optimization
parameters and the measured and simulated VSWR values of
the proposed UWB antenna are shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2, respectively. It is below 2 not only over the entire UWB band, but
also at even higher frequencies.
B. Single Band-Notched UWB Antenna Design
In order to reduce the EMI with the WiMAX band, a
band-notched function covering the interval 3.3–3.6 GHz is desired. The proposed single-notched UWB antenna is illustrated
in Fig. 3. Notice that the gap region of the
element has
an augmented design to enhance its capacitance. By placing the
element close to the feed line, this resonator is strongly
coupled to it. It captures and stores all of the input energy at

104

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 60, NO. 1, JANUARY 2012

TABLE I
COMPARISONS BETWEEN SIMULATIONS AND THEORETICAL PREDICTIONS OF
THE BAND-NOTCHED FREQUENCY

its resonance frequency and thus creates a single band-notched
frequency filter. Note that with this design, there is no need to
change the dimensions of the original UWB antenna. Rather,
one simply needs to tune the resonance of the
element by
adjusting its dimensions to achieve the desired band-notched
function. Moreover, this electrically small resonator has a
minimal impact on other frequencies.
A parametric study of the
element provides a necessary understanding of the interaction between the main radiator
and the
element. The band-notched frequency is given
approximately by the expression

Fig. 4. HFSS-predicted VSWR characteristics for various total lengths
of the CLL element. The gap size
is fixed at 0.5 mm.

(1)
where
is the total length of the
element,
is
the effective dielectric constant, and is the speed of the light.
Given a desired resonance frequency, one can use (1) to define
the initial total length of the
element for an initial design.
One can then use numerical simulations to adjust the dimensions of the
element to obtain the final design. Table I
shows a comparison between the simulated and theoretical predictions of the resonance frequency corresponding to different
total lengths of the
element. Note that the ability to further tune the CLL element by modifying its gap region is not
only advantageous for achieving a specific band-notched function, but it also allows one to shrink the overall size of the CLL
element. This provides one with the ability to add extra parasitic
elements in a limited space and, hence, leads to a smaller-sized
antenna without a loss in the desired functionality.
The HFSS-predicted VSWR values for the single-notched
UWB antenna are shown in Figs. 4 and 5, respectively, for different lengths and sizes of the gap in the CLL element. Clearly,
one can see that the length of the
element and the size
of its gap play critical roles in defining the band-notched
frequency. For instance, the band-notched frequency decreases
from 3.927 to 3.559 GHz as the length
increases from
29.0 to 32.0 mm. Similarly, because the capacitance decreases
as the CLL gap size, , increases, the band-notched frequency
increases from 3.342 to 3.703 GHz as
is varied from 0.5
mm to 2.0 mm. Note, however, that differences between the
theoretical and simulated results in Table I also occur because
of the coupling between the feedline and the CLL element.
When the
element is close to the feed line, the increased
coupling produces extra capacitance, which then leads to a
slightly lower band-notch frequency.
A comparison of the VSWR values for several gap sizes between the
element and the feed line, , is given in Fig. 6.
One finds that as the
element is moved closer to the feed

Fig. 5. HFSS-predicted VSWR characteristics for various CLL element gap
. The total length
of the CLL element is fixed at 32.0 mm.
sizes,

Fig. 6. HFSS-predicted VSWR values for various gap sizes
between the
of the CLL element and
CLL element and the feedline. The total length
are fixed at 32.0 mm and 0.5 mm, respectively.
its gap size

line, a significant increase in the coverage of the band-notched
frequency response occurs. For instance, the coverage of the
band-notched frequency increases from 0.216 GHz to 1.108
GHz as
decreases from 0.45 mm to 0.15 mm. Consequently,
the location of the
element also provides a means to adjust
the coverage of the band-notched filter. These results further illustrate that when
changes, there is only a small effect on the
band-notch frequency, e.g., the shift is only 0.1 GHz in Fig. 6.
We note that having control of the coverage of the band-notch
filter is very important to achieving the desired, practical performance characteristics of a band-notched UWB antenna.
The final dimensions of the
element for the single
band-notched frequency design, as shown in Fig. 3. The

LIN et al.: SINGLE, DUAL AND TRI-BAND-NOTCHED UWB ANTENNAS USING CLL RESONATORS

105

Fig. 7. HFSS-predicted surface current distributions at different frequencies.
(a) 3 GHz, (b) 3.342 GHz, and (c) 10.0 GHz.

Fig. 9. The HFSS-predicted overall efficiency and maximum realized gain for
the single band-notched UWB antenna.

Fig. 8. Measured and HFSS-predicted VSWR values for the single
band-notched UWB antenna.

HFSS-predicted current distributions at 3.0, 3.342 and 10.0
GHz are shown in Fig. 7. The currents flow mainly on the
element at the notch frequency 3.342 GHz, while the currents
on the radiating elements (the feedline and the monopole) at
that frequency are very small. In contrast, the currents on the
feedline and the monopole are large and negligible on the
element away from the frequency band of the effective
notched-filter.
The measured and simulated VSWR values versus frequency
of the single band-notched UWB antenna are compared in
Fig. 8. The measured bandwidth of the band-notched is from
3.25 to 3.62 GHz. As expected, the desired band-notched frequency is introduced by the
element. Additionally, when
compared to the original UWB antenna, the single band-notched
UWB antenna successfully blocks the WiMAX band (3.3–3.6
GHz) and still maintains good impedance matching at the rest
of the UWB band. The HFSS-predicted overall efficiency and
maximum realized gain values are shown in Fig. 9 as a function
of the frequency. As designed, significant drop of these values
is observed within the rejection band.
C. Dual Band-Notched UWB Antenna Design
In addition to the WiMAX services from 3.3–3.6 GHz, the
lower WLAN (5.15–5.35 GHz) band may also cause interference within the UWB band. To avoid EMI in this band, the dual
band-notched UWB antenna and the optimized design paramaters for the
element shown in Fig. 10 was investigated.
It is achieved simply by adding an additional CLL element near
the feed line; i.e., the
element is introduced on the other
side of the feed line. To design a notch-band filter for the lower

Fig. 10. Geometry the dual band-notched UWB antenna. All dimensions are in
,
,
,
,
,
,
mm:
.
and

WLAN frequency set, one can still use (1) as the initial design
to predict the approximate length of the
element. Even
though the
element is added near the feed line, it was
found (rather attractively) that the dimensions of the main radiator and
element remain the same. Therefore, each CLL
element is acting independently and, consequently, one obtains
two band-stop filters at the different, desired frequencies.
The measured and simulated VSWR values versus frequency for the dual band-notched UWB antenna with two
CLL elements (one on each side of the feedline) are compared
in Fig. 11. Good agreement is observed. The measured dual
band-notched frequencies cover 3.23–3.70 GHz and 5.09–5.58
GHz. The HFSS-predicted overall efficiency and maximum
realized gain values versus frequency are shown in Fig. 12.
They show the anticipated dramatic drop in these values at both
band-notched frequency bands.
D. Tri-Band Notched UWB Antenna Design
Besides the WiMAX and lower WLAN bands, the higher
WLAN band also operates within the UWB band. Again, to re-

106

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 60, NO. 1, JANUARY 2012

Fig. 11. Comparison of the measured and simulated VSWR values of the dual
band-notched UWB antenna.

Fig. 13. The tri-band notched UWB antenna. (a) Geometry, and (b) design di,
,
,
mensions. All dimensions are in mm:
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
.

Fig. 12. The HFSS-predicted overall efficiency and maximum realized gain for
the dual band-notched UWB antenna.

duce the potential EMI effects, a tri-band notched design was
obtained. As with the single and dual band cases, the tri-band design begins with (1) to obtain the approximate length of the additional CLL element. However, the available area near the feed
line limits where one can put a third CLL element. Nevertheless,
as mentioned above, the benefit of the CLL element is its flexible
tuning ability, i.e., the size of the gap region in the CLL element
provides an extra degree of freedom to obtain the band-notched
frequency within a specific area. Therefore, we simply shorten
the total length of the
element and decrease the gap size
simultaneously to not only maintain the desired band-notched
frequency, but also provide the extra area to add the additional
element to realize the third band-notched frequency filter.
Additionally, since the higher frequency WLAN band is narrower than the lower one, the gap between the
element
and the feed line should also increase. Again, the size of the
main radiator and the ground plane size remain the same. Moreover, the dimension of the
element also remains the same.
Thus, the only difference between the dual and tri band-notched
designs is to change the dimensions of the
element in
order to add the
element. The proposed tri-band-notched
UWB antenna and the correspondingly optimized parameters
are shown in Fig. 13.
Good agreement between the HFSS-predicted and the measured VSWR values versus frequency is shown in Fig. 14 for the

Fig. 14. Comparison of the measured and simulated VSWR values of the triband notched UWB antenna.

Fig. 15. The HFSS-predicted overall efficiency and maximum realized gain for
the tri-band notched UWB antenna.

tri-band notched UWB antenna. The measured tri-band notches
cover the bands: 3.29–3.67 GHz, 5.12–5.35 GHz and 5.67–5.83
GHz. As shown in Fig. 15, the antenna gain and radiation efficiency significantly decrease over these three band-notched frequency sets. The HFSS-predicted current distributions shown
in Fig. 16 demonstrate that the currents flow around each CLL

LIN et al.: SINGLE, DUAL AND TRI-BAND-NOTCHED UWB ANTENNAS USING CLL RESONATORS

107

Fig. 16. HFSS-predicted current distributions at each band-notched frequency
(a) 3.342 GHz (b) 5.279 GHz (c) 5.821 GHz.

Fig. 18. Geometry of the tri-band notched UWB antenna with one slot CLLbased element in the top-loaded monopole and two CLL elements near its feed,
,
,
,
line. All dimensions are in mm:
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
, and
.

The HFSS-predicted and measured far-field radiation patterns
for the proposed tri-band notched UWB antenna at 3.1, 5.5 and
10.6 GHz are shown in Fig. 17. Note that if the radiating element is assumed to be printed on the xy-plane, its radiation pattern is x-polarized because its monopole lies along the x-direction. Therefore, the E-plane is the xy-plane, while the H-plane
is the yz-plane. The results shown in Fig. 17 demonstrate, as
anticipated, that the H-plane patterns are omni-directional in
all cases, while the E-plane patterns similarly exhibit the expected monopole-like behaviors. Distortions in the E-plane patterns begin to occur at higher frequencies because the radiating
elements are no longer small relative to those wavelengths.
III. ALTERNATIVE TRI-BAND NOTCHED UWB ANTENNA
DESIGN
Fig. 17. The comparison between HFSS-predicted and measured radiation patterns (dB), E-Plane (left) and H-Plane (right), for the tri-band notched UWB
antenna. (a) 3.1 GHz, (b) 5.5 GHz, (c) 10.6 GHz. Solid line: simulation; dashed
line: measurement.

element only at the corresponding band-notch frequency. Additionally, one observes a small coupling between the
and
elements. Since the frequencies of the lower and higher
WLAN bands are very close, less coupling would be desirable.
One way to reduce this coupling is to increase the distance between the
and
elements. One could, for example,
shorten the total length of each CLL element and decrease the
gap size in order to have a much smaller sized CLL element
and then increase the distance between the
and
elements. Unfortunately, this simple approach requires a much
narrower gap in both the
and
elements; it leads
to difficulties due to limitations of the fabrication techniques.

Recall that while the coupling between the
and
elements in the tri-band notched design shown in Fig. 13 was
small, the dimensions of those elements still had to be retuned
to achieve the desired band-notched frequencies. As a consequence, the design becomes sensitive to the associated small gap
regions needed to maintain their resonance frequencies while
being smaller in size. Thus, it requires some effort to tune the
entire system properly. To remove this sensitivity issue, we developed an alternative tri-band notched UWB antenna, shown
in Fig. 18. It has one CLL-based slot element embedded in the
top-loaded monopole and two additional CLL elements near
the feedline. The idea is to tune the CLL-based slot element
for the longer wavelength, lower frequency rejection band and
then have the two, basically independent CLL elements near
the feedline create the second and third band-notched filters.
As the widths and lengths of this slot element are adjusted,
its band-notch frequency can be tuned. This is illustrated with
the single-notch version shown in Fig. 19. The measured and

108

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 60, NO. 1, JANUARY 2012

Fig. 19. Measured and simulated VSWR values for the single-notched UWB
antenna. A CLL-based slot element is introduced into the top-loaded monopole
to achieve the desired band-notched response at 3.35 GHz. The surface current
distribution at this rejection frequency is localized near the slot element.

Fig. 21. The HFSS-predicted overall efficiency and maximum realized gain for
the tri-band notched UWB antenna displayed in Fig. 18.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

Fig. 20. Measured and simulated VSWR values versus frequency for the triband notched UWB antenna displayed in Fig. 18.

HFSS-predicted VSWR values are given along with the surface
current distribution at 3.35 GHz, its band-notch frequency. Most
of the currents are seen to flow around the gap region of the
CLL-based slot element.
This embedded CLL-based design provides a more flexible
tuning ability, particularly within the limited area close to the
feed line. The two additional CLL elements are again located
on opposite sides of the feedline. They were initially designed
using (1). The final optimization parameters are shown in
Fig. 18. Fig. 20 gives a performance comparison between the
measured and simulated values of the VSWR versus frequency
for the fabricated antenna. The measured tri-band notches
cover 3.29.–3.72 GHz, 5.07–5.40 GHz and 5.62–5.93 GHz.
As shown in Fig. 21, the antenna gain and radiation efficiency
significantly decrease at these three band-notched frequencies and have high values away from them. We note that the
measured upshifts in the lowest band shown in both Figs. 19
and 20 were consistent and found to be caused by fabrication
errors. The fabricated slot widths were simply narrower than
specified. We had emphasized the fabrication tolerances of the
CLL elements with the vendor (Prototon Circuits, Tucson, AZ)
anticipating that those of the larger slots would not be an issue.
While this choice led to the very good agreement at the higher
two-bands shown in Figs. 19 and 20, it clearly impacted the
lower frequency band results.

Two CLL-based tri-band notched UWB antennas were introduced in this paper. They were obtained by using either three
additional CLL elements or by embedding a CLL-based slot element into the top-loaded monopole and adding two CLL elements near the feed line. Single- and dual-notched band antennas were also considered to explain the performance characteristics of the tri-band designs. Parametric studies of all of
these antennas provided guidelines on how to control not only
the band-notched frequencies, but also the bandwidth of the rejected frequencies as well. The tri-band notched design with
the three CLL elements had some sensitivities to achieve the
band-notched characteristics for the closely adjacent frequencies associated with the lower and higher WLAN band that
were overcome with the other design. By introducing the CLLbased slot element in the top-loaded monopole, the area limitations near feed line and the couplings introduced from the
close proximity of two CLL elements were avoided. This design thus provided three independently tunable band-notch sets.
The comparisons between the measured and simulated values
for both tri-band notched UWB designs verified their predicted
performance characteristics, including stable radiation patterns,
high gain and radiation efficiencies, and broadband matched
impedance values for all radiating frequencies
REFERENCES
[1] Federal Communications Commission Revision of Part 15 of the Commission’s Rules Regarding Ultra-Wideband Transmission System from
3.1 to 10.6 GHz Federal Communications Commission. Washington,
DC, ET-Docket, 2002, pp. 98–153, FCC.
[2] W. S. Lee, D. Z. Kim, K. J. Kim, and J. W. Yu, “Wideband planar
monopole antennas with dual band-notched characteristics,” IEEE
Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 54, pp. 2800–2806, Jun. 2006.
[3] S. J. Hong, J. W. Shin, H. Park, and J. H. Choi, “Analysis of the bandstop techniques for ultrawideband antenna,” Microw. Opt. Technol.
Lett., vol. 49, pp. 1058–1062, May 2007.
[4] X. L. Bao and M. J. Ammann, “Printed band-reject UWB antenna
with H-shaped slot,” in Proc. IEEE IWAT Workshop, Mar. 2007, pp.
319–322.
[5] Q. Chu and Y. Yang, “A compact ultrawideband antenna with 3.4/5.5
GHz dual band-notched characteristics,” IEEE Trans. Antennas
Propag., vol. 56, pp. 3637–3644, Dec. 2008.

LIN et al.: SINGLE, DUAL AND TRI-BAND-NOTCHED UWB ANTENNAS USING CLL RESONATORS

[6] H. Zhang, R. Zhou, Z. Wu, H. Xin, and R. W. Ziolkowski, “Designs
of ultra wideband (UWB) printed elliptical monopole antennas with
slots,” Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett., vol. 52, pp. 486–471, Feb. 2010.
[7] J. Kim, C. S. Cho, and J. W. Lee, “5.2 GHz notched ultra-wideband
antenna using slot-type SRR,” Electron. Lett., vol. 42, pp. 315–316,
Mar. 2006.
[8] J. Liu, S. Gong, Y. Xu, X. Zhang, C. Feng, and N. Qi, “Compact printed
ultra-wideband monopole antenna with dual band-notched characteristics,” Electron. Lett., vol. 44, pp. 710–711, Jun. 2008.
[9] J. Ding, Z. Lin, and Z. Ying, “A compact ultra-wideband slot antenna
with multiple notch frequency bands,” Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett., vol.
49, pp. 3056–3060, 2007.
[10] A. Erentok, P. Luljak, and R. W. Ziolkowski, “Antenna performance
near a volumetric metamaterial realization of an artificial magnetic conductor,” IEEE Trans. Antennas and Propag,, vol. 53, pp. 160–172, Jan.
2005.
[11] J. B. Pendry, A. J. Holden, D. J. Robbins, and W. J. Stewart, “Magnetism from conductors, and enhanced non-linear phenomena,” IEEE
Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., vol. 47, pp. 2075–2084, Nov. 1999.
[12] R. Marqués, F. Martín, and M. Sorolla, Metamaterials With Negative
Parameters: Theory, Design and Microwave Applications. Hoboken,
NJ: Wiley, 2008.
[13] C.-C. Lin and R. W. Ziolkowski, “Tri-band notched ultra-wideband
antenna using capacitively loaded loops,” presented at the Int. Symp.
on Antennas and Propagation, Toronto, Canada, Jul. 2010, paper 408.4.
Chia-Ching Lin (S’07–A’11) received the B.Sc. and
M.Sc. degrees in electronic engineering from the National Taiwan University of Science and Technology
(NTUST), in 1999 and 2003, respectively, and the
ECE Ph.D. degree from the University of Arizona,
Tucson, in 2010.
He is currently with Ruckus Wireless, Sunnyvale,
CA. His research interests include electrically small
antennas and metamaterial applications to antenna
designs.

109

Peng Jin (S’05–M’10) received the EE B.Sc. degree
from the University of Science and Technology of
China, Heifei, in 1999, the EE M.Sc. degree from the
North Dakota State University, Fargo, in 2004, and
the ECE Ph.D. degree from the University of Arizona, Tucson, in 2010.
He is currently with the Signal Integrity Group,
Broadcom Corporation, Irvine, CA. His research interests include electrically small antennas and metamaterial applications to antenna designs.

Richard W. Ziolkowski (M’87–SM’91–F’94) received his Sc.B. degree in physics, magna cum laude
with honors, from Brown University (1974), his M.S.
(1975) and Ph.D. (1980) degrees in physics from
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. He
was a member of the Engineering Research Division
at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
from 1981 to 1990 and served as the leader of the
Computational Electronics and Electromagnetics
Thrust Area for the Engineering Directorate. He
currently is serving as the Litton Industries John M.
Leonis Distinguished Professor in the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering at the University of Arizona. He holds a joint appointment with
the College of Optical Sciences. He is an IEEE Fellow and an OSA Fellow. He
was the President of the IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society in 2005. He
continues to be very active in the IEEE, OSA, and APS professional societies.
He has served on the International Advisory Boards and Technical Program
Committees of several international conferences, including iWAT, ISAP, Metamaterials, and META. His research interests include the application of new
physics and engineering ideas to linear and nonlinear problems dealing with
the interaction of electromagnetic waves with complex media, metamaterials,
and realistic structures.

