Molecular Cell

Review
Hypoxia-Inducible Factors
and the Response to Hypoxic Stress
Amar J. Majmundar,1,3 Waihay J. Wong,1,3 and M. Celeste Simon1,2,*
1Abramson

Family Cancer Research Institute
Hughes Medical Institute
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
3These authors contributed equally to this work
*Correspondence: celeste2@mail.med.upenn.edu
DOI 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.09.022
2Howard

Oxygen (O2) is an essential nutrient that serves as a key substrate in cellular metabolism and bioenergetics. In
a variety of physiological and pathological states, organisms encounter insufficient O2 availability, or
hypoxia. In order to cope with this stress, evolutionarily conserved responses are engaged. In mammals,
the primary transcriptional response to hypoxic stress is mediated by the hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs).
While canonically regulated by prolyl hydroxylase domain-containing enzymes (PHDs), the HIFa subunits
are intricately responsive to numerous other factors, including factor-inhibiting HIF1a (FIH1), sirtuins, and
metabolites. These transcription factors function in normal tissue homeostasis and impinge on critical
aspects of disease progression and recovery. Insights from basic HIF biology are being translated into pharmaceuticals targeting the HIF pathway.
Introduction
Aerobic organisms require oxygen (O2) to produce energy. For
this reason, O2 deprivation creates significant stress in living
cells. O2 deprivation is also paradoxically linked to the inappropriate accumulation of free radicals, which cause additional
stress on proteins and DNA in the cell. During low O2 (hypoxic)
conditions, therefore, cells activate a number of adaptive
responses to match O2 supply with metabolic, bioenergetic,
and redox demands. Cells temporarily arrest in the cell cycle,
reduce energy consumption, and secrete survival and proangiogenic factors. These events are coordinated by various cellular
pathways, including the unfolded protein response (UPR),
mTOR signaling, and gene regulation by hypoxia-inducible
factors (HIFs). Initially identified as a regulator of erythropoietin
(EPO) production, HIF is recognized as a key modulator of the
transcriptional response to hypoxic stress. Besides its adaptive
function in cellular stress responses, recent work has also revealed important roles for HIF in both physiological and pathological processes.
HIFs are obligate heterodimers consisting of an O2-labile
a subunit and a stable b subunit. Mammals possess three isoforms of HIFa, of which HIF1a and HIF2a (also known as
EPAS1) are the most structurally similar and best characterized.
HIF3a (or IPAS) exists as multiple splice variants, some of which
inhibit HIF1a and HIF2a activity in a dominant-negative fashion
(reviewed in Kaelin and Ratcliffe, 2008). HIF1a is expressed ubiquitously in all cells, whereas HIF2a and HIF3a are selectively
expressed in certain tissues, including vascular endothelial cells
(ECs), type II pneumocytes, renal interstitial cells, liver parenchymal cells, and cells of the myeloid lineage (reviewed in Bertout et al., 2008). In Figure 1, we highlight some of the novel mechanisms of HIFa regulation and HIFa transcriptional activity.
HIFa subunits heterodimerize with the stable HIF1b, or ARNT,
subunit through their HLH and PAS domains. HIF heterodimers
294 Molecular Cell 40, October 22, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc.

recognize and bind to hypoxia response elements (HREs) in
the genome, which are similar to enhancer box (E box) motifs
and have the consensus sequence G/ACGTG. Genome-wide
chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments indicate that the
correlation between HRE occupancy and hypoxic gene induction ranges from high for HIF1a-upregulated genes to low for
both HIF2a-induced genes and HIF-repressed genes (Mole
et al., 2009; Xia et al., 2009). In these latter cases, flanking
sequences and additional regulatory elements appear to further
specify HIF binding and target gene regulation. Recent examples
of additional modulators of HIF-dependent gene regulation
include the forkhead transcription factor FOXA2 and the chromatin modifier Reptin (Qi et al., 2010; Lee et al., 2010).
In this review, we will focus on recent insights into HIF expression, activation, and function in various cellular and tissue stress
responses. We will also summarize emerging data on the crosstalk between HIFs and other metabolic regulators and provide
a survey of recent pharmacologic strategies to modulate HIF
activity in the treatment of diseases.
HIFa Regulation by O2 Availability
In well-oxygenated environments, HIFa subunits are hydroxylated at conserved proline residues. These modifications are
mediated by PHDs, whose activities are regulated by O2 availability (reviewed in Kaelin and Ratcliffe, 2008). Hydroxylated
HIFa is, in turn, recognized and marked for proteosomal destruction by an E3 ubiquitin ligase, the von Hippel-Lindau protein
(pVHL) complex. In the setting of hypoxic stress, PHD activity
is diminished, and stabilized HIFa proteins can induce transcription of genes with adaptive functions.
PHD Regulation by O2 and Metabolites
Because of their dependence on O2 as a direct substrate, PHDs
have been proposed to be ‘‘oxygen sensors’’ linking cellular
O2 concentration to HIF molecular responses. This notion is

Molecular Cell

Review

Figure 1. Regulation and Function of HIFa Subunits
In the presence of oxygen and a-ketoglutarate, HIF PHDs and FIH1 hydroxylate and inactivate HIFa. PHD and FIH1 activity are inhibited by hypoxia
and certain intracellular metabolites, including ROS, fumarate, succinate,
and potentially 2-hydroxyglutarate, resulting in HIFa stabilization. HIFa expression and/or activity is also regulated posttranslationally by sirtuins and IH. HIFa
stabilization results in the activation of a transcriptional program with effects
on metabolism, redox homeostasis, vascular remodeling, tumorigenesis,
inflammation, and other processes.

supported by measurements of the apparent KM of PHD
enzymes in vitro (reviewed in Kaelin and Ratcliffe, 2008). The
KM values for oxygen were considerably higher than intracellular
pO2, suggesting that PHDs may function below saturation
kinetics in vivo. While the enzymatic properties of PHDs in vitro
do not necessarily reflect their properties in vivo, these measurements imply that O2 availability can influence PHD activity across
the entire physiological range.
Cellular metabolites can also influence PHD activity. PHDs
utilize the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle intermediate 2-oxoglutarate (a-ketoglutarate) as a substrate and can be inhibited by
other TCA intermediates (Kaelin and Ratcliffe, 2008; Klimova
and Chandel, 2008; Sudarshan et al., 2009). As we will describe
later, several types of cancer have been shown to exploit this
metabolic regulation and bear mutations that are likely to stimulate HIF activity.
O2-Dependent Regulation of HIFa by FIH1
HIFa subunits are also substrates for an asparaginyl hydroxylase:
factor-inhibiting HIF-1a (FIH1). This enzyme is O2 dependent and,
thus, represents another component of the oxygen-sensing
machinery. Hydroxylation by FIH1 disrupts a critical interaction
between HIFa and coactivators p300/CBP, impairing HIF transcriptional activity (reviewed in Webb et al., 2009a; Mahon
et al., 2001). However, FIH1 has other targets (Webb et al.,
2009a, 2009b), indicating it may have HIF-independent functions
as well.
Fih1À/À mice were recently generated (Zhang et al., 2010) and
found to be viable, unlike VhlÀ/À and Phd2À/À animals (Gnarra
et al., 1997; Takeda et al., 2006). Mutant adult mice displayed
a range of metabolic phenotypes including decreased weight,
decreased adiposity, hyperventilation, and increased insulin
sensitivity. Remarkably, several of these phenotypes were

recapitulated by neuronal-specific deletion of Fih1. Moreover,
when placed on a high-fat diet, Fih1À/À mice were less likely to
develop insulin resistance, weight gain, and hepatic steatosis
(or fatty liver). In correlation with these phenotypes, the authors
observed that Fih1 deletion affected the activity of AMPK,
PGC1a, and PPARg—factors which have been implicated in
metabolism and metabolic diseases (Muoio and Koves, 2007;
Towler and Hardie, 2007; Picard and Auwerx, 2002). Collectively,
these data indicate that FIH1 regulates fat storage, insulin sensitivity, and organism growth. Furthermore, FIH1 deficiency can
prevent features of obesity, diabetes, and nonalcoholic fatty liver
disease (Adams and Lindor, 2007) in animals with increased
caloric intake. Thus, FIH1 represents a novel drug target for treating these diseases.
Although several in vitro phenotypes of Fih1À/À fibroblasts
were HIF1a dependent or synergized with Vhl deficiency, it is
unclear if FIH1 negatively regulates the HIF pathway in vivo.
HIF1a activation can inhibit adipocyte differentiation in vitro
(Yun et al., 2002), consistent with the reduced adipocyte density
observed in Fih1À/À mice. On the other hand, HIFa activation in
Vhl-deficient livers actually promotes hepatic steatosis (Rankin
et al., 2009), in contrast to Fih1À/À mice. Therefore, further investigation is required to determine whether, as a general rule, FIH1
deficiency promotes metabolic phenotypes in vivo through HIFa
activity.
Mitochondria as Oxygen Sensors and PHD Regulators
Considerable evidence indicates that mitochondria also participate in O2 sensing. Genetic and pharmacological approaches
have been employed to inhibit components of the electron transport chain (ETC) in mitochondria. These studies have shown that
in moderate hypoxia (1.5% O2), mitochondria stimulate the
production of cellular reactive oxygen species (ROS), which
inhibit PHD activity and HIFa degradation (reviewed in Kaelin,
2005; Klimova and Chandel, 2008). These oxygen radicals
emanate specifically from complex III of the ETC (Klimova and
Chandel, 2008). Moreover, Waypa and colleagues were able to
visualize redox changes within specific cellular compartments
using a novel redox-sensitive fluorescent protein (RoGFP)
(Waypa et al., 2010). Hypoxia-induced oxidants were observed
in the inner-membrane space of mitochondria as well as in the
cytosol, where ROS could influence PHD activity (Waypa et al.,
2010). These findings support a model in which mitochondria
sense O2 deprivation and produce ROS to regulate PHD activity.
The role of mitochondria in O2 sensing may be restricted,
however, to moderate hypoxia (1.5%). As O2 levels decline
further to anoxia (0% O2), HIFa can be stabilized in the absence
of functional mitochondria, suggesting that factors in addition to
mitochondrial ROS antagonize PHD activity in more severe O2
deprivation (Kaelin, 2005; Klimova and Chandel, 2008). For
example, this may represent a setting in which PHDs directly
sense O2 through its availability as a substrate.
In spite of the available data, the notion of mitochondria as O2
sensors is controversial, and many questions remain unanswered. For instance, it is unclear what triggers mitochondria
to release ROS in response to low intracellular pO2 and whether
ROS modulate PHD function directly or indirectly. Furthermore, it
has been suggested that mitochondria signal to PHDs indirectly
through their consumption of O2 and not through ROS
Molecular Cell 40, October 22, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc. 295

Molecular Cell

Review
production (Klimova and Chandel, 2008). This model could also
explain the observation that mitochondrial inhibitors impair
hypoxic stabilization of HIF1a: specifically, decreased mitochondrial O2 consumption due to ETC inhibition could help maintain
cytosolic pO2 and, consequently, PHD activity. However, studies
using cytochrome b mutant cells suggest this is not the case (Klimova and Chandel, 2008). In these cells, which generate mitochondrial ROS but fail to consume O2, HIF1a can be stabilized
by hypoxia in an oxidant-dependent manner. This indicates
that mitochondrial ROS production, but not O2 consumption, is
important for HIFa stabilization.
Therefore, there may be multiple O2 sensors—PHDs, FIH1,
mitochondria, others—which collectively promote HIF molecular
responses in hypoxia.
The Growing Complexity of HIF Regulation
O2 sensing via hydroxylases and mitochondria define a core
feature of HIF regulation. However, the list of additional cues
that modulate the HIF pathway is growing. These factors range
from microRNAs to oncogenic signals, and some prominent
examples are listed in Table 1. Two novel aspects of HIF regulation will be described below.
Sirtuins
Sirtuins are a stress-responsive family of nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide (NAD+)-dependent histone deacetylases that influence gene transcription, metabolism, DNA repair, and organism
life span (Haigis and Sinclair, 2010). These enzymes respond to
perturbations in the ratio of oxidized NAD+/reduced NADH and,
therefore, represent sensors of the cellular redox state (Denu,
2003). Sirtuins have recently been shown to modulate HIF
activity, strengthening the link between cellular stress and HIF
responses (Dioum et al., 2009; Lim et al., 2010; Zhong et al.,
2010).
Garcia and colleagues showed that Sirt1 forms a complex with
HIF2a, but not HIF1a, and deacetylates lysine residues in the
HIF2a protein (Dioum et al., 2009). Sirt1 also co-occupies the
Epo promoter with HIF2a and enhances HIF2a transcriptional
activity in vitro. Finally, the Sirt1/HIF2a axis functions in vivo to
regulate renal and hepatic erythropoietin expression. These
data suggest that HIF2a-dependent EPO production is responsive to perturbations in the cellular redox state as well as
changes in systemic O2 availability (see HIF in a Systemic
Response to Hypoxia). Sirt1 may not exclusively regulate
HIF2a, however, as it was recently reported that Sirt1 interacts
with and deacetylates HIF1a also (Lim et al., 2010). In contrast
to HIF2a, HIF1a transcriptional activity is repressed by deacetylation. Under hypoxic stress, decreased cellular NAD+ downregulates Sirt1, increases HIF1a acetylation, and thereby
promotes the expression of HIF1a target genes. Interestingly,
overexpression studies indicate that HIF2a can outcompete
HIF1a for binding to Sirt1. Further in vivo experiments will be
required to elucidate the complex role for Sirt1 in modulating
both HIF1a and HIF2a activity, and to resolve certain discrepancies between these studies.
Sirt6 is also linked to HIF1a (Zhong et al., 2010). Sirt6À/À cells
and mice display increased rates of glucose consumption and
elevated expression of glycolytic genes, many of which are
HIF1a targets. Sirt6 occupies the promoters of these genes
296 Molecular Cell 40, October 22, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc.

and appears to enhance the deacetylation of associated
histones, consistent with transcriptional repression. Furthermore, Sirt6 deficiency stimulates HIF1a protein expression.
Using chemical inhibitors and RNA interference, the authors
showed that HIF1a expression contributes, in part, to the metabolic phenotypes observed in Sirt6À/À cells and mice. Because
the chemical inhibitors employed may lack target specificity, it
will be important to determine if genetic loss of HIF1a also
rescues phenotypes in Sirt6À/À animals. Lastly, Sirt6 and
HIF1a appear to form a weak interaction, although the structure
and functional significance of this complex requires further characterization. Based on these findings, Sirt6 appears to regulate
glucose homeostasis by inhibiting HIF1a and glycolytic gene
expression.
In sum, sirtuin activity can modulate HIF-dependent regulation
of homeostatic processes such as erythropoiesis and glucose
metabolism. The interplay between HIFs and sirtuins may also
extend to stress settings such as hypoxic tumors, in which
cellular redox balance is perturbed. However, the nature of the
HIF response will depend on which sirtuin is engaged.
Intermittent Hypoxia
Intermittent hypoxia (IH) occurs when tissue O2 tension cycles
between normal and hypoxic levels. This pattern of O2 deprivation is particularly relevant during recurrent sleep apnea, in which
transient pauses in breathing lead to chronic IH during sleep
(Basner, 2007). Patients with this disease have a higher likelihood of developing hypertension, atherosclerosis, myocardial
infarction, and stroke (Basner, 2007).
Prabhakar and colleagues have detailed how HIFa subunits
are differentially regulated by IH. HIF1a protein expression is
induced during IH, secondary to many factors including NADPH
oxidase-dependent ROS generation (Peng et al., 2006; Yuan
et al., 2008). Of note, this source of ROS is distinct from the mitochondrial ROS which inhibits PHD activity during continuous
hypoxia. Studies in Hif1a+/À mice also demonstrated that
HIF1a promotes the acute respiratory and cardiovascular consequences of IH. In contrast, HIF2a expression is repressed by IH
through calpain-dependent mechanisms (Nanduri et al., 2009).
HIF2a inhibition appears to contribute to IH-induced oxidative
stress and cardiovascular responses in vivo. These data indicate
that HIF1a and HIF2a may play opposing roles in IH-associated
disease.
Differential Regulation of HIFa Subunits
As the cases of IH and Sirt1 indicate, HIF1a and HIF2a can be
regulated through distinct mechanisms. Additional examples
from the literature support this concept. HIF1a, but not HIF2a,
appears to be degraded in hypoxia in an Hsp70/CHIP-dependent fashion (Luo et al., 2009). On the other hand, HIF2a
mRNA translation is uniquely responsive to iron content through
an iron-response element in its 50 UTR (Sanchez et al., 2007).
These observations underscore the complexity of the HIF
response, and suggest that HIFa subunits require distinct forms
of regulation because they mediate nonoverlapping biological
effects, as was observed in mouse models of IH.
The Role of HIF in Metabolism and Redox Homeostasis
In artherosclerotic diseases, tissues such as the heart, brain, and
limb muscles are susceptible to ischemic insults (Beckman et al.,

Molecular Cell

Review
Table 1. Regulators of HIF Activity

Table 1. Continued

HIF Regulators

Inflammation

VHL

Y HIFa stability (see text)

NF- kB

[ HIF1a transcription (see text)

PHD1/2/3

Y HIFa stability (see text)

p44/42 MAPK

FIH1

Y HIFa transcriptional activity (see text)

[ HIF1a expression downstream of LPS (Frede
et al., 2006)

Siah1a/2

[ HIF1a stability; promotes degradation of
PHD1/3 in hypoxia (Simon, 2004)

RSUME

[ HIF1a stability; enhances SUMOylation
(Carbia-Nagashima et al., 2007)

SENP1

[ HIF1a stability; removes SUMO moieties
(Cheng et al., 2007)

HSP90

[ HIF1a stability (Isaacs et al., 2002)

COMMD1

Y HIF1a stability and disrupts HIFa/
b dimerization (van de Sluis et al., 2010, 2009)

HSP70/CHIP

Y HIF1a stability but not HIF2a stability (
Luo et al., 2009)

CITED2

Y HIF1a activity (Bakker et al., 2007)

Metabolites/Related
2-oxoglutarate

Y HIFa stability as PHD cofactor (see text)

Ascorbate

Y HIFa stability as PHD cofactor (Kaelin and
Ratcliffe, 2008)

Iron (Fe2+)

Y HIFa stability as PHD cofactor (Kaelin and
Ratcliffe, 2008)

IRP

Y HIF2a mRNA translation in response to high
intracellular iron (see text)

NO

Modulates HIFa expression (Kaelin and
Ratcliffe, 2008)

Intermittent hypoxia [ HIF1a stability but Y HIF2a stability (see text)
Redox
ROS

[ HIFa stability (see text); observed in
inflammatory cells (Shatrov et al., 2003)

Sirt1

Y HIF1a and [ HIF2a transcriptional activity
(see text)

Sirt6

Binds to and Y HIF1a stability/activity (see text)

MicroRNAs
miR-107

microRNA leads to Y ARNT expression
(Yamakuchi et al., 2010)

miR-17-92

miRNA cluster; microRNAs lead to Y HIF1a
expression (Taguchi et al., 2008)

Oncogenes/Tumor Suppressors
PI3K/Akt

[ HIF1a expression (Brugarolas and Kaelin,
2004; Mottet et al., 2003)

mTORC1

[ HIF1a mRNA translation (Brugarolas and
Kaelin, 2004; Bernardi et al., 2006)

GSK3b

Y HIF1a stability (Mottet et al., 2003)

p53

Y HIF1a/ARNT expression (Blagosklonny et al.,
1998; Yamakuchi et al., 2010; Sano et al., 2007;
Schmid et al., 2004; Ravi et al., 2000)

b-catenin

Binds to HIF1a; [ HIF1a transcriptional activity
(Kaidi et al., 2007)

Ras

[ HIF1a expression by ROS generation (Gerald
et al., 2004)

ERb

Y HIF1a stability (see text)

SDH/FH

Mutations in these genes lead to [ HIF1a
stability (see text)

IFN-g

[ HIF1a and HIF2a(?) expression (see text)

IL-4

[ HIF1a and HIF2a(?) expression (see text)

2002). Deprivation of O2, nutrients, and growth factors causes
stress in these pathologies, and cell death can ensue. The HIF
pathway is activated and applies a critical adaptive response
(Ratan et al., 2007; Shohet and Garcia, 2007). For instance,
HIF1a expression correlates with increased preservation of brain
and heart tissue in many (Ratan et al., 2007; Shohet and Garcia,
2007; Baranova et al., 2007) but not all (Helton et al., 2005)
models of strokes and heart attacks, respectively.
HIF1a and Glucose Catabolism
HIF1a is thought to mediate cardio- and neuroprotection, in part
by reprogramming cellular metabolism. Because molecular O2
serves as an electron acceptor in oxidative phosphorylation,
a central adaptation to hypoxia is a shift toward nonoxidative
forms of carbon metabolism and ATP production, such as anaerobic glycolysis (reviewed in Gordan et al., 2007b). HIF1a guides
this shift by promoting the expression of glucose transporters,
glycolytic enzymes, and LDHA, which replenishes NAD+ for
further glycolysis (Gordan et al., 2007b).
Moreover, studies by Semenza, Denko, and their colleagues
showed that pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 1—encoded by
the HIF1a target gene PDK1—represses the flux of pyruvate
into acetyl-CoA, diverting carbon away from mitochondria
and suppressing O2 consumption (reviewed in Simon, 2006).
In HIF1a-deficient cells, O2 deprivation leads to reduced ATP
levels, elevated ROS, and apoptosis (Simon, 2006; Gordan
et al., 2007b). The oxidant stress observed in hypoxic HIF1a
mutant cells appears to be secondary to inappropriate
acetyl-CoA generation and TCA cycle activity, such that forced
PDK1 expression reduces ROS and promotes survival in
hypoxia. These findings clearly demonstrate that a HIF1adependent metabolic shift promotes viability during hypoxic
stress.
HIF1a activity was more recently shown to influence the
pentose phosphate pathway or PPP (Zhao et al., 2010). The
PPP converts glycolytic intermediates into ribose-5-phosphate
(R5P), a substrate for nucleotide biosynthesis (Tong et al.,
2009). In drug-resistant leukemia cells, HIF1a promotes the
flux of glucose carbon through a nonoxidative arm of PPP relative to the oxidative arm (Zhao et al., 2010). These effects are
critical for leukemia cell growth and survival. HIF1a, therefore,
redirects the metabolism of glucose for use both as an energy
source and as a building block for RNA and DNA synthesis,
and these adaptations are likely important for facilitating cell
growth and survival in hypoxic tumors.
Overall, HIF1a can directly reprogram the metabolic state in
cells, and this response is important in hypoxic settings such
as vascular disease and cancer.
Molecular Cell 40, October 22, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc. 297

Molecular Cell

Review
HIF2a Functions in Metabolism
Many of the metabolic genes described above are directly regulated by HIF1a but not HIF2a (Hu et al., 2003; Raval et al., 2005).
Nevertheless, HIF2a also plays a critical role in metabolism.
Semenza and colleagues demonstrated that both HIF1a and
HIF2a can modulate the expression of cytochrome c oxidase isoforms so as to maximize efficiency of the ETC (reviewed in Gordan et al., 2007b). Defects in this response lead to impaired ATP
production and elevated oxidant production in hypoxia.
HIF2a also has some unique targets in cellular redox homeostasis. Garcia and colleagues showed that HIF2a stimulates
the expression of genes encoding antioxidant enzymes, such
as SOD2, in mice (reviewed in Gordan et al., 2007b). This transcriptional program appears to suppress aberrant ROS accumulation, such that HIF2a deficiency leads to severe striated muscle
damage. More recently, HIF2a has been demonstrated to play
a similar function in renal cancer: HIF2a depletion leads to
reduced expression of genes with anti-oxidant functions, such
as heme oxygenase 1 (HMOX1) and others (Bertout et al.,
2009). In correlation, HIF2a loss induces increased cellular
ROS, activation of p53, and tumor cell death. These effects are
all enhanced with ionizing radiation treatment, which robustly
elevates cellular ROS levels. Therefore, HIF2a promotes redox
homeostasis and cellular viability in multiple settings. Moreover,
HIF2a can mediate tumor cell resistance to ionizing radiation.
Studies in Phd1À/À mice provide further evidence that HIF2a
can buffer tissues from hypoxic stress (Aragones et al., 2008).
When placed under ischemic stress, Phd1À/À limb skeletal
muscle is protected from oxidative damage and cell death. Interestingly, similar effects of PHD1 inhibition have been observed in
liver ischemia (Schneider et al., 2010). The ischemic tolerance in
Phd1À/À skeletal muscle is predominantly dependent on HIF2a,
which is negatively regulated by PHD1. HIF2a may promote this
tolerance by modulating glucose metabolism, for Phd1À/À muscle
displays a metabolic shift toward anaerobic glycolysis and
elevated expression of Pdk4. Like Pdk1, Pdk4 inhibits the mitochondrial consumption of glucose-derived carbon (Huang et al.,
2002). Although HIF2a does not alter glucose utilization directly
(Hu et al., 2003; Raval et al., 2005), it could function indirectly
through regulation of PPARa, which is essential for ischemic tolerance in Phd1À/À skeletal muscle (Aragones et al., 2008) and may
regulate Pdk4 expression (Huang et al., 2002). Alternatively,
HIF2a’s more established role in redox homeostasis (reviewed
in Gordan et al., 2007b; Bertout et al., 2009) could contribute to
the ischemic phenotypes in Phd1À/À skeletal muscle.
Collectively, these observations indicate that both HIF1a and
HIF2a control cell metabolism and redox homeostasis through
nonoverlapping transcriptional programs (Figure 2).
HIF Regulation of Lipid Metabolism
In tissues such as the heart and liver, lipids provide a rich source
of energy via oxidative phosphorylation (Jungermann, 1988;
Shohet and Garcia, 2007). In the setting of hypoxic stress, lipid
metabolism is reprogrammed to suppress mitochondrial oxidation of lipid-derived carbon. Specifically, hypoxia stimulates lipid
storage and inhibits lipid catabolism through b oxidation (Huss
et al., 2001; Whitmer et al., 1978; Bostrom et al., 2006).
It was previously unclear if HIFs control these adaptations.
However, a recent study implicates HIF2a in the regulation of
298 Molecular Cell 40, October 22, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc.

Figure 2. HIFa Control of Cell Metabolism
HIFs modulate cellular metabolism to facilitate cellular adaptation to lowoxygen environments. Glucose consumption and glycolysis are promoted
primarily by HIF1a, while fatty acid storage is promoted by HIF2a. Both factors
inhibit mitochondrial consumption and oxidation of carbon, leading to
a decreased production of ATP through oxidative phosphorylation and less
ROS as a byproduct. Instead, glycolysis makes a larger contribution to ATP
synthesis in the cell. Furthermore, HIF2a inhibits ROS production through
SOD2 and other targets.

lipid metabolism (Rankin et al., 2009). Mice with liver-specific
deletion of Vhl exhibit fatty livers (or hepatic steatosis), marked
by increased lipid droplet deposition and decreased fatty acid
consumption. In mutant livers, genes involved in b oxidation
are reduced, while those important in lipid storage are enhanced.
These phenotypes are dependent on HIF2a more so than HIF1a.
Therefore, in the pseudohypoxic context of Vhl-deficient livers,
HIF2a represses lipid catabolism and oxidation (Figure 2).
The Role of HIF in Vascular Responses to Hypoxia
It is well established that, in response to hypoxia, HIF1a and
HIF2a regulate angiogenic genes such as vascular endothelial
growth factor (Manalo et al., 2005; Hu et al., 2003; Kelly et al.,
2003). In correlation, HIFs are known to play essential roles in
embryonic vascular development (Ramirez-Bergeron et al.,
2006; Covello and Simon, 2004). Recent studies have demonstrated how HIFs can influence the adult vascular system,
specifically during angiogenesis in pathologic settings.
HIF1a in Ischemia-Induced Angiogenesis
Growing evidence supports a role for HIF1a activity in the neoangiogenic response to tissue ischemia. In a femoral artery ligation
model of hindlimb ischemia, ischemic limb muscle in Hif1a+/À
mice exhibits impaired HIF1a induction, defective activation of
angiogenic factors, and decreased reperfusion (Bosch-Marce
et al., 2007). Conversely, adenoviral delivery of constituitively
active HIF1a to the site of ligation leads to enhanced reperfusion.
Therefore, HIF1a expression is essential and sufficient to
promote reperfusion in ischemic skeletal muscle.
The authors also demonstrated that as mice age, the ischemic
induction of HIF1a diminishes, and, in association, reperfusion is
compromised. This is more than a correlation, for ectopic HIF1a

Molecular Cell

Review
expression partially rescues limb perfusion in old mice. Interestingly, impaired HIF1a activation is also observed in the hypoxic
skin wounds of aged diabetic mice (Liu et al., 2008). These findings underscore the importance of aging as a modulator of
ischemic responses. This is especially crucial because peripheral arterial disease, the vascular disease which femoral artery
ligation models, is associated with age (Beckman et al., 2002).
A proangiogenic role for HIF1a has also been described in
other injury models such as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy,
myocardial infarction, skin wound healing, and retinal neovascularization (Sano et al., 2007; Jiang et al., 2009; Yoshida et al.,
2010; Heinl-Green et al., 2005; Mace et al., 2007; Liu et al.,
2008; Botusan et al., 2008). Relative to HIF1a, the angiogenic
functions of HIF2a have not been as extensively tested in these
disease models (Dioum et al., 2008). In sum, these data suggest
that HIFa expression, and in particular HIF1a expression, in
ischemic tissues promotes angiogenesis. This has strong clinical
implications for angiogenic therapies in patients with ischemic
disease (see HIF-Targeted Therapies).
These findings also raise questions about the critical cell types
in which HIFs operate during angiogenesis. While HIF activation
in tissue parenchyma can influence EC behavior indirectly
through expression of angiogenic factors, HIFs have also been
shown to play essential roles within the vascular endothelium
during vessel formation (see next section).
HIF in Endothelial Cells
In ischemic tissues, ECs respond to cues provided by numerous
distinct cell populations—including parenchyma, pericytes, and
inflammatory cells—to form new blood vessels (Carmeliet,
2005). They also alter their function in direct response to changes
in O2 availability. For instance, hypoxia and HIF1a can direct ECs
to form tube-like structures in vitro, mimicking morphologic
changes which arise during angiogenesis (Yamakawa et al.,
2003; Manalo et al., 2005).
Several studies have evaluated how HIFs regulate EC functions in hypoxic settings in vivo. This began with studies of
mice with EC-specific deletion of Hif1a (Tang et al., 2004).
Mutant mice exhibit defective blood vessel growth in hypoxic
settings such as skin wounds and xenograft tumors. In correlation, isolated mutant ECs exhibit defective hypoxic activation
of VEGF and its receptor VEGFR2 as well as impaired cell proliferation and migration. Therefore, the authors proposed that
HIF1a promotes an autocrine VEGF/VEGFR2 loop in ECs that
promote their functions in tissue angiogenesis.
HIF2a is highly expressed in ECs during development, suggesting it also may play a cell-autonomous role in this cell type
(Ema et al., 1997). Mice with EC-specific deletion of Hif2a exhibit
homeostatic defects in vessel integrity as well as impaired tumor
angiogenesis (Skuli et al., 2009). Xenograft tumors in mutant
mice are smaller, more hypoxic, and possess fewer luminized
(functional) vessels relative to tumors in control mice. Mutant
ECs from these animals exhibit defective adherence and
impaired hypoxic induction of genes with functions in cell adhesion. These findings indicate that HIF2a instructs ECs to form
more functional blood vessels, and this role is critical for tumor
development.
Of note, VEGF expression is unaffected in HIF2a mutant ECs,
implying that it is a HIF1a-specific target in ECs (Tang et al.,

2004; Skuli et al., 2009; Manalo et al., 2005). This is consistent
with prior studies indicating that HIF1a and HIF2a can promote
the expression of distinct genes in ECs and, therefore, may carry
out unique functions in this compartment (Elvert et al., 2003).
Overall, these studies highlight how ECs respond to local
hypoxia during vessel growth and how HIFs mediate
this response, particularly in tumor settings (see Figure 4C).
Therefore, inhibiting HIF function in ECs could have utility in the
treatment of cancer. This could be problematic, however,
in situations where HIFs play tumor suppressive roles (see The
Role of HIF in Cancer).
PHD2 in Endothelial Cells
Studies in Phd2+/À mice indicate that PHD inhibition in ECs may
have clinical implications (Mazzone et al., 2009). Xenograft
tumors grown in Phd2 heterozygotes are less hypoxic and
have more functional vessels than those in control mice. ECs
from these animals are more quiescent and exhibit an altered
transcriptional program dependent on HIF2a. The authors
propose that this transcriptional response directs ECs to form
more organized vessels in tumors, and that this ‘‘normalization’’
plays a causal role in reducing the number of tumor metastases
in mutant mice. It has also been suggested that normalization of
tumor vessels can enhance tumor perfusion and potentially drug
delivery (Jain, 2005). Therefore, PHD inhibition could be effective
in several aspects of cancer therapy. However, the authors
caution that in their models, PHD activity was impaired in the
microenvironment but not in the tumor cells. This is an important
distinction given the oncogenic role of HIFs (see next section).
The Role of HIF in Cancer
There is ample evidence that solid tumors frequently encounter
hypoxic stress. Rapidly proliferating cancer cells may outgrow
their vascular network, limiting O2 diffusion within the tumor.
Hypoxic stress can also be caused by perfusion defects as
a result of abnormal tumor blood vessel structure and function.
Not surprisingly, therefore, solid tumors often exhibit high levels
of HIFa accumulation (reviewed in Bertout et al., 2008). It should
be noted that HIFa expression in cancer cells is also increased
via hypoxia-independent mechanisms (see Table 1 and relevant
sections). Genetic alterations such as VHL mutation in renal cell
carcinoma, mutations in the Wnt/b-catenin signaling pathway in
colon carcinoma, and other oncogenic events have been
reported to result in HIFa stabilization (reviewed in Kaelin,
2008). Collectively, these findings indicate that HIFa expression
and the downstream activation of the hypoxic stress response
are widespread in many cancers.
Work from many laboratories has revealed that HIF-regulated
gene responses play key roles in various aspects of cancer
development, including proliferation (MYC), angiogenesis
(VEGF, PDGF), apoptosis/autophagy (NDRG2, BNIP3), metabolism (PDK1, LDHA), DNA damage response (GADD45A), microRNAs (MIR210), extracellular matrix remodeling (LOX, MMP1),
cell migration, and invasion (CXCR4, SDF1) (Huang et al.,
2009; reviewed in Bertout et al., 2008; reviewed in Kaelin,
2008) (Figure 3). The importance of HIF activity in cancer is
demonstrated by the fact that increased HIFa expression correlates with poor clinical prognosis in many cancer types (reviewed
in Semenza, 2007).
Molecular Cell 40, October 22, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc. 299

Molecular Cell

Review

Figure 3. Effects of HIF on Multiple Steps of Cancer Development
HIF is stabilized by hypoxia and other nonhypoxic stimuli in many cancers. HIF
activity in cancer has been associated with (1) putative cancer ‘‘stem’’ cell
maintenance and increased expression of genes involved in (2) proliferation
and survival, (3) metabolism, (4) angiogenesis, (5) recruitment of infiltrating
cells such as TAMs and bone marrow-derived cells, and (6) tumor cell invasion
and metastasis. Some examples of HIF-regulated genes and oncogenic pathways are given in parentheses.

HIFa Subunits and Tumorigenesis
Surprisingly, HIF1a expression correlates with lower cancer
stage or decreased patient mortality in certain cancers; examples include non-small-cell lung cancer, head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, and neuroblastoma (reviewed in Bertout
et al., 2008). HIF2a expression in these malignancies, on the
other hand, is a negative prognostic factor. This difference
between HIF1a and HIF2a expression suggests that HIFa
subunits may contribute differently toward tumorigenesis in
certain cancers.
The distinct roles of HIF1a and HIF2a in tumorigenesis have
been studied most thoroughly in VHL-deficient clear cell renal
cell carcinoma (ccRCC). VHL-deficient ccRCC cluster into
tumors which express either both HIF1a and HIF2a or HIF2a
only (Gordan et al., 2008). Overexpression and knockdown
studies of HIF1a and HIF2a in VHL-deficient ccRCC cell lines
indicate that HIF2a, but not HIF1a, is necessary for tumor growth
(reviewed in Kaelin, 2008). One possible explanation for this
effect is that HIF1a antagonizes MYC function, whereas HIF2a
promotes MYC activity (Gordan et al., 2007a). Microarray
profiling of ccRCC specimens revealed that compared to tumors
expressing both HIFa isoforms, tumors exclusively expressing
HIF2a upregulate MYC target genes, proliferate faster, and are
300 Molecular Cell 40, October 22, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc.

relatively resistant to replication stress (Gordan et al., 2008).
Another mechanism by which HIFs exert opposing effects on
tumor behavior lies in the hypoxic regulation of the tumor
suppressor protein p53. HIF1a binds to p53, resulting in p53
stabilization and hypoxia-induced cell death (Moeller et al.,
2005; An et al., 1998). This interaction between HIF1a and p53
is probably a late evolutionary development in higher organisms,
as HIF1a indirectly inhibits the p53 homolog CEP-1 in C. elegans
after radiation-induced DNA damage (Sendoel et al., 2010). In
contrast, recent experiments have shown that HIF2a indirectly
suppresses p53 activity and thereby promotes radioresistance
and chemoresistance in tumor cells (Bertout et al., 2009; Roberts
et al., 2009). These findings indicate that certain cancers,
including but not limited to renal cell carcinoma, may differ in
their tumor behavior and drug response according to the expression of HIF1a and/or HIF2a. Whether selective pressures exist in
renal cell carcinomas for the loss of HIF1a and gain of HIF2a
expression and whether HIFa expression patterns influence
renal cancer progression remain subjects for further study.
Does HIF2a have greater oncogenic capacity than HIF1a in
non-VHL malignancies? A recent report demonstrated that
shRNA-mediated inhibition of HIF2a, but not HIF1a, in multiple
human cancer cell lines reduced cell proliferation in vitro and
subcutaneous xenograft growth in mice (Franovic et al., 2009).
However, functional rescue experiments using exogenous
HIF2a were lacking. In vivo models of lung tumorigenesis
suggest a more complex role for HIF2a in cancer. Constitutively
stabilized HIF2a increases lung tumor burden, tumor vascularity,
and local invasion in Kras mutant mice (Kim et al., 2009). Intriguingly, a lung-specific deletion of HIF2a in the same Kras mutant
model similarly enhances lung tumorigenesis (Mazumdar et al.,
2010). A clue to this paradox may lie in the observation that
HIF2a gain of function and HIF2a loss of function promote tumorigenesis via two unrelated mechanisms (Mazumdar et al., 2010;
Kim et al., 2009). If we assume that different HIF2a targets have
varying activation thresholds—due to HRE sequence conservation, coregulation by other transcription factors, composition of
the transcription machinery, etc.—then according to the extent
of HIF2a stabilization, either tumor suppressive (e.g., AKT inhibition) or tumor promoting effects (e.g., angiogenesis, epithelial to
mesenchymal transition) may ensue.
The biology of HIF3a in relation to tumorigenesis remains
largely unstudied. HIF3a is downregulated in renal cell carcinoma specimens, consistent with its known function as a dominant-negative inhibitor of HIF1a and HIF2a (Maynard et al.,
2007). In summary, HIF1a, HIF2a, and HIF3a have varying
effects on cancer development because of their context-dependent functions and distinct modes of action.
HIF and Metastasis
Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a key feature of
invasive cells and can be characterized by the loss of epithelial
cell-cell contact and the acquisition of mesenchymal features
and motility. Hypoxia and HIF influence the expression of many
EMT regulators to promote metastasis. Studies by Maxwell
and colleagues revealed that HIF1a expression in renal cell
carcinoma is sufficient to induce the loss of E-cadherin and an
increase in invasion (reviewed in Kaelin, 2008). HIF1a directly
regulates TWIST1 transcription and increases tumor cell

Molecular Cell

Review
Figure 4. Macrophage and Vascular
Responses to HIF
(A) NFkB-dependent regulation of HIF in macrophages. In addition to direct HIF stabilization,
hypoxic inhibition of PHDs results in IKK-mediated
degradation of the NFkB inhibitor IkB. Activated
NFkB directly transactivates HIF1a.
(B) HIF activity is involved in multiple aspects of
macrophage behavior via the induction of genes
involved in (1) bacterial killing (NOS2, CRAMP),
(2) migration and invasion (CXCR4, FN1, MCSFR),
(3) cytokine production (IL1b, IL6, IL12, TNFa), and
(4) metabolism (GLUT1, PGK1).
(C) HIF1a stabilization in ECs increases (1) VEGF
expression, (2) migration, and (3) proliferation,
whereas HIF2a stabilization promotes (4) EC
adhesion to the extracellular matrix.

invasiveness and metastasis in head and neck squamous cell
cancer (Yang et al., 2008). In prostate cancer, HIF1a promotes
SNAIL1 nuclear localization in a VEGF-dependent manner
(Mak et al., 2010). This finding is clinically relevant and implicates
HIF1a expression in prostate cancer progression, because lowgrade prostate tumors repress HIF1a via estrogen receptor
b (ERb) activity, while high-grade tumors downregulate ERb,
resulting in increased HIF1a expression, SNAIL1 nuclear localization, and metastasis (Mak et al., 2010). HIF1a also induces lysyl oxidase (LOX), which is an extracellular matrix remodeling
enzyme as well as an upstream regulator of SNAIL1. As Giaccia
and colleagues demonstrated, inhibition of LOX reduces tumor
cell invasion, adhesion, and metastasis in an orthotopic breast
cancer model (reviewed in Bertout et al., 2008). Recent work
from the same group indicates that LOX secreted by the primary
tumor remodels distant premetastatic sites to recruit tumor and
stromal cells (Erler et al., 2009). The hypoxic tumor microenvironment therefore promotes metastasis via the activation of
multiple HIF-responsive genes that together regulate all stages
of cancer spread, including invasion, intravasation, and distant
extravasation.
HIF and Tumor Angiogenesis
HIF exerts similar effects on ECs in both tumor and nonmalignant
tissues to mediate angiogenesis (see Figure 4C and relevant
section). However, unlike ‘‘normal’’ blood vessels, tumor-associated vasculature is leaky, tortuous, and noncontiguous
(reviewed in Jain, 2005). Tumor-associated endothelium interacts with tumor cells as well as nonmalignant stromal cells,
such as fibroblasts and infiltrating bone marrow-derived cells.
These cell types differ widely in their responses to hypoxic stress
and therefore may contribute differently to tumor angiogenesis.
For example, HIF activity in glioblastoma promotes tumor angiogenesis, as HIF1a inhibition in glioblastoma cells reduces
vascular remodeling and normalizes tumor vasculature
(Du et al., 2008). Paradoxically, HIF1a depletion in these cells
also increases perivascular invasion, because of the direct effect
of decreased VEGF levels on glioblastoma cell migration
(Du et al., 2008). The development of tumor vasculature also
appears to require myeloid-derived VEGF specifically. Deletion
of the HIF target gene Vegf in myeloid cells increases murine
mammary tumor growth, tumor oxygenation, and tumor sensitivity to chemotherapy, most likely due to ‘‘normalization’’ of
tumor vessels (Stockmann et al., 2008). In contrast, haploinsufficiency of the HIF regulator Phd2 in nonmalignant tissues allowed

the ‘‘normalization’’ of xenograft tumor vasculature, improved
oxygenation, and reduced metastasis (Mazzone et al., 2009).
However, the dependence of these effects on HIF stabilization
remains uncertain. These studies illustrate that the tumor vasculature responds to distinct and perhaps opposing HIF activities in
different cell types. Therefore, selective manipulation of the
hypoxic stress response in distinct tumor subcompartments
may be more effective than systemic HIF inhibition as an antitumor strategy.
HIF and Cancer Stem Cells
Hypoxia can promote an undifferentiated state in certain populations of stem and progenitor cells (Yoshida et al., 2009; Keith and
Simon, 2007). Similarly, hypoxia and HIFs may contribute to the
maintenance of putative cancer ‘‘stem’’ cells. HIF depletion in
CD133+ glioblastoma cells, which are enriched for cancer stem
cells, reduces their tumorigenic and angiogenic potential
in vitro and in vivo (Li et al., 2009). Furthermore, HIF2a is selectively expressed in the CD133+ subpopulation of glioblastoma
cells, whereas HIF1a expression is widespread among both
tumorigenic and nontumorigenic cells, suggesting that HIF2a
may fulfill a specific function in glioblastoma stem cells (Li et al.,
2009). In a separate study, a small subset of immature cells in
human neuroblastoma specimens was found to express neural
crest markers and HIF2a; upon HIF2a knockdown, these cells
underwent early sympathetic differentiation (Pietras et al.,
2009). However, the precise identity and function of these cells
remain unclear. It is interesting to note that both CD133+ glioblastoma cells and putative neuroblastoma progenitor cells express
high levels of HIF2a while residing in periendothelial niches
(Pietras et al., 2009; Calabrese et al., 2007). Although the extent
of O2 saturation within these capillaries is unknown, these findings suggest that HIFa expression in certain cancer cell subpopulations may be controlled by both hypoxia and nonhypoxic
stimuli, including metabolic aberrations in cancer.
HIF Regulation by Cancer Metabolism
Inactivating homozygous mutations in the TCA cycle genes
fumarate hydratase (FH) and succinate dehyrogenase (SDH)
lead to elevated HIF1a expression in cells and human tumors
(reviewed in King et al., 2006). Mice bearing kidney-specific inactivation of Fh1 were generated and develop renal cysts marked
by HIF activation (reviewed in Kaelin and Ratcliffe, 2008).
HIF1a appears to be induced because of increased cellular
levels of fumarate and succinate, which can inhibit PHD activity
directly or indirectly through promotion of cellular ROS
Molecular Cell 40, October 22, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc. 301

Molecular Cell

Review
(Sudarshan et al., 2009; Kaelin and Ratcliffe, 2008; Klimova and
Chandel, 2008). These findings clearly demonstrate the extent to
which metabolism influences HIFa expression in cancer. While it
is assumed that HIF1a activation is promoting oncogenesis in
these tumor settings, HIFs can be tumor suppressive in some
contexts. The Fh1 mutant mice will be a useful tool for testing
this premise directly.
More recently, heterozygous mutations in isocitrate dehydrogenase 1/2 (IDH1/2) have been linked to cancer. Mutant IDH1
proteins are defective in their ability to oxidize isocitrate into
a-ketoglutarate (aKG) (Dang et al., 2009; Zhao et al., 2009).
Zhao and colleagues suggested that through a dominant-negative effect, cells expressing mutant IDH1 have reduced aKG
levels, a substrate for PHDs. Therefore, HIF1a is indirectly stabilized. HIF1a expression is also elevated in human gliomas with
mutant IDH1. Hence, they proposed that mutations in IDH1
promote cancer by indirectly activating HIF1a, in the manner of
FH and SDH mutations. On the other hand, multiple studies
have since shown that lysates from IDH1/2 wild-type and mutant
cancers have comparable levels of aKG, indicating that one wildtype allele of IDH1/2 may be sufficient to generate aKG in vivo
(Dang et al., 2009; Ward et al., 2010; Gross et al., 2010). As
a consequence, comparable levels of substrate should be available for PHD activity in wild-type and mutant cancers. This
indicates the initial IDH1/HIF1a model may be inaccurate: IDH1
mutations may stimulate oncogenic HIF responses, but not
necessarily through decreased aKG levels.
Moreover, mutant IDH1 has an unexpected reverse activity
which reduces aKG and generates 2-hydroxyglutarate (2HG),
a metabolite associated with brain tumors (Aghili et al., 2009).
Elevated 2HG is also observed in IDH1/2 mutant glioblastoma
and acute myeloid leukemia (Dang et al., 2009; Ward et al.,
2010; Gross et al., 2010). Therefore, it has been suggested that
this metabolite, synthesized by mutant IDH1/2, promotes
cancers of the brain and blood. The molecular and cellular functions of 2HG, however, are poorly understood. One possibility is
that 2HG inhibits PHD activity and, in turn, promotes oncogenic
HIF responses in IDH1/2 mutant tumors. 2HG may promote
cancer through HIF-independent mechanisms as well. Further
investigation is required to test the role of 2HG in the HIF
pathway and, more generally, in tumor cell functions.
Overall, the latter studies on IDH1/2 mutations underscore the
notion that metabolic enzymes can be oncogenic as well as
tumor suppressive (e.g., FH and SDH). They also challenge the
concept that mutations in metabolic genes induce cancer solely
through aberrant HIF responses.
The Role of HIF in Inflammation
In response to inflammatory stimuli, local vascular permeability
increases, resulting in the increased delivery of effector cells
and nutrients to the inflamed tissue. The combination of reduced
circulation at the site of inflammation and increased metabolic
demand from infiltrating immune cells and pathogens eventually
leads to the local depletion of O2, resulting in hypoxia. Hypoxia
and associated HIF activation have been observed in tissue
specimens from patients with inflammatory conditions such as
arthritis, artherosclerosis, and autoimmune diseases (reviewed
in Nizet and Johnson, 2009).
302 Molecular Cell 40, October 22, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc.

HIF Regulation in Inflammatory Cells
The response to hypoxic stress is tightly coupled to the immune
response via NF-kB signaling (Figure 4A). Work from Nizet, Chilvers, Taylor, and their colleagues has demonstrated that HIF
promotes NF-kB activity in macrophages, neutrophils, and
nonimmune cells (reviewed in Nizet and Johnson, 2009).
Hypoxia inhibits PHD1 activity and thereby IKK hydroxylation,
resulting in IKK activation and phosphorylation of IkB. Subsequent IkB degradation liberates NF-kB from the cytoplasm,
resulting in the transcription of downstream target genes,
including inflammatory cytokines (Cummins et al., 2006). Interestingly, NF-kB signaling in activated macrophages directly
regulates Hif1a transcription (Rius et al., 2008). Macrophages
lacking IKKb cannot stabilize HIF1a after hypoxic or microbial
challenge and exhibit decreased HIF target gene expression.
However, activation of NF-kB alone is insufficient for HIF1a
stabilization, indicating that maximal HIF1a accumulation
depends on both transcriptional regulation by NF-kB and posttranslational regulation by hypoxia (Rius et al., 2008). This coordinated response suggests a mechanism for graded HIF1a
expression in immune cells, in which maximal HIF1a activity is
induced in cells located at the site of most severe inflammation,
where hypoxic and inflammatory stresses are simultaneously
present.
In contrast, hypoxic induction of HIF2a does not require IKKb
(Rius et al., 2008). A recent report proposes that HIF1a and
HIF2a are differentially stabilized in macrophages exposed,
respectively, to TH1 cytokines such as IFN-g and to TH2 cytokines
such as IL-4 (Takeda et al., 2010). Because IFN-g, but not IL-4,
activates the NF-kB pathway in macrophages (Thieu et al.,
2007), this finding suggests that HIF1a expression, but not that
of HIF2a, is dependent on NF-kB. However, a subsequent study
showed significant HIF2a induction with TH1 cytokines IFN-g and
LPS (Imtiyaz et al., 2010). Available data on this aspect of HIF2a
regulation in macrophages are therefore conflicting. Given the
role of HIF-2a in myeloid-mediated inflammatory responses
(see below), it will be important to fully assess the contribution
of NF-kB signaling toward HIF2a activity in immune settings, as
well as other mechanistic differences between HIF1a and
HIF2a stabilization in hypoxic and inflammatory stress.
HIF and Myeloid Cell Function
Myeloid cells—neutrophils, macrophages, and dentritic cells—
play key effector roles in acute and chronic inflammation. Conditional inactivation of HIF1a or HIF2a in these cells has revealed
crucial roles for both subunits in mediating inflammatory
responses (Figure 4B). The absence of HIF1a in myeloid cells
significantly weakens the inflammatory response in mouse
models of arthritis and chronic dermatitis, and confers increased
protection against LPS-induced sepsis (Peyssonnaux et al.,
2007; Cramer et al., 2003). Macrophages lacking HIF1a exhibit
decreased motility, invasiveness, and bacteriocidal activity
(Peyssonnaux et al., 2005; Cramer et al., 2003). Similarly, conditional HIF2a loss in myeloid cells decreases macrophage motility
and invasion and reduces the severity of cutaneous inflammation
and LPS-induced endotoxemia (Imtiyaz et al., 2010). The cytokine response to LPS-induced sepsis, characterized by the
production of TNF-a, IL-1b, IL-6, and IL-12, is reduced in the
absence of either HIF1a or HIF2a (Imtiyaz et al., 2010;

Molecular Cell

Review
Peyssonnaux et al., 2007). Interestingly, HIF1a and HIF2a coordinate similar inflammatory responses via distinct mechanisms.
HIF1a controls the metabolic shift from oxidative phosphorylation to glycolysis in activated macrophages (Cramer et al.,
2003). In contrast, HIF2a regulates the transcription of cytokines,
such as IL1b, IL12, and TNFa, as well as genes involved in
macrophage migration and chemotaxis, such as FN1 and
CXCR4 (Imtiyaz et al., 2010). A gene expression profile analysis
of primary human macrophages in which HIF1a or HIF2a were
depleted confirms that HIF1a and HIF2a induce overlapping
but distinct sets of genes (Fang et al., 2009).
Hypoxia and HIFs regulate other myeloid lineages also.
Neutrophils express HIF1a, but not HIF2a, under hypoxic and
inflammatory stress (Imtiyaz et al., 2010). HIF1a expression in
these cells is required for host pathogen defense and neutrophil
survival (Walmsley et al., 2006; Peyssonnaux et al., 2005). HIF1a
expression in dentritic cells is required for the expression of costimulatory molecules after LPS exposure and the induction of
allogenic T cell proliferation (Jantsch et al., 2008). In mast cells,
HIF1a expression regulates the production of proinflammatory
cytokines, vasodilators such as VEGF, and the histamine synthesizer histidine decarboxylase (reviewed in Nizet and Johnson,
2009). Therefore, HIFs coordinate the behavior of different
immune cells in a hypoxic inflammatory milieu to produce
a unified immune response.
HIF and Tumor-Associated Macrophages
Studies in many cancer types have shown that macrophage infiltration correlates with unfavorable clinical prognosis (reviewed in
Lewis and Pollard, 2006). Macrophages are recruited to tumor
areas primarily by the production of chemoattractants by
hypoxic tumor and stromal cells, such as the HIF target genes
CSF1 and VEGF (reviewed in Murdoch et al., 2004). Recent
work has also shown that apoptotic cells, such as those in
hypoxic regions of a tumor, produce soluble factors such as
TGF-b to attract monocytes and macrophages (Herr et al.,
2009). Once recruited, tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs)
exhibit a highly dynamic immune phenotype which promotes
tumor growth, angiogenesis, metastasis, and tumor immunosuppression. Furthermore, as Harris and colleagues noted,
TAMs exhibit elevated HIF1a and HIF2a expression due to the
hypoxic tumor microenvironment (reviewed in Murdoch et al.,
2004).
HIF2a expression in breast and cervical cancer TAMs is correlated with unfavorable prognoses, suggesting a functional relevance for HIF2a in this setting (Kawanaka et al., 2008; Leek
et al., 2002). Conditional HIF2a deletion in the myeloid lineage
in mice has revealed key roles for HIF2a and TAMs in tumorigenesis. In mouse models of hepatocellular carcinoma and colitisassociated colon carcinoma, mice lacking HIF2a in their myeloid
cells exhibit decreased recruitment of TAMs into tumor areas
(Imtiyaz et al., 2010). This finding correlates with reduced tumor
mitotic index, lower tumor grade, and a downward trend in the
number and size of colitis-induced colon carcinomas (Imtiyaz
et al., 2010). It will be of interest to explore whether HIF1a
expression in TAMs is functionally relevant to tumor progression
in similar in vivo models, and if so, whether HIF1a and HIF2a
complement each other in this context. Recent work suggests
that the absence of HIF1a in macrophages has no effect on

tumor spheroid infiltration, tumor cell proliferation, or tumor invasiveness in vitro, but reduces cell death in tumor spheroid
cultures (Werno et al., 2010).
HIF in a Systemic Response to Hypoxia
Organs involved in erythropoiesis (red blood cell production) can
respond to systemic hypoxia to increase red blood cell numbers
and the O2-carrying capacity of blood (reviewed in Fandrey,
2004). EPO, a preferential HIF2a target, stimulates this process
(reviewed in Lee, 2008; Fandrey, 2004). Abundant data suggest
that the PHD2/pVHL/HIF2a axis controls EPO levels and, therefore, adult erythropoiesis in humans and mice. Human genetic
studies of familial polycythemia (abnormally elevated hemoglobin or red blood cell count) identified mutations in VHL, which
impaired HIF1a degradation (Lee, 2008). Subsequent genetic
and biochemical analyses have identified inactivating mutations
in PHD2 and activating lesions in EPAS1/HIF2a (Lee, 2008;
Furlow et al., 2009). Mouse models bearing mutations in these
genes have also been generated and exhibit abnormal erythropoiesis (Lee, 2008). More recent findings indicate that while the
kidney and liver are the main organs producing EPO, HIFa
expression in other distant tissues—skin and glial cells—also
influences EPO production in response to hypoxia (Boutin
et al., 2008; Weidemann et al., 2009).
Furthermore, studies comparing Tibetan highlanders and the
closely related lowland Han Chinese have provided an evolutionary link between the PHD2/pVHL/HIF2a axis and erythropoiesis (Yi et al., 2010; Beall et al., 2010; Simonson et al., 2010). The
authors compared the frequencies of single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) alleles between these groups, and noted significant
divergence in allelic frequency of SNPs located in or near the
PHD2/EGLN1 and EPAS1/HIF2a genes. These findings correlated with lower hemoglobin and erythrocyte levels in the blood
of Tibetan subjects, suggesting that the PHD2 and HIF2a alleles
common to Tibetan highlanders cause relatively decreased
erythropoiesis. It has been proposed that the divergence in
HIF2a and PHD2 occurred through natural selection, whereby
Tibetan HIF2a and PHD2 alleles facilitate survival in the high altitude of the Tibetan plateau. For instance, Tibetans are resistant
to developing chronic mountain sickness, which is marked by
elevated erythropoiesis. These reports highlight the evolutionary
implications of PHD2 and HIF2a function in red blood cell
production.
In sum, studies in humans and rodents have contributed to
a body of knowledge linking the PHD/pVHL/HIF pathway to erythropoiesis. This information is now being applied to the treatment of anemia (see below).
HIF-Independent Responses to Hypoxic Stress
While this review emphasizes the role of HIFs in response to O2
deprivation, the hypoxic response is an integration of multiple
O2-sensing pathways. Substantial evidence indicates that
mTOR signaling and the UPR play critical roles in hypoxic
adaptations by modulating protein translation, cell metabolism,
and cell fate (Wouters and Koritzinsky, 2008; Sengupta et al.,
2010; Spriggs et al., 2010; Buchberger et al., 2010). We must
also consider that other transcriptional regulators, such as
PGC1a, can complement the HIF response in ischemic
Molecular Cell 40, October 22, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc. 303

Molecular Cell

Review
settings: PGC1a, independent of HIF, promotes VEGF expression and neoangiogenesis in a model of hindlimb ischemia
(Arany et al., 2008).
In addition, PHDs and FIH1 have non-HIFa substrates which
may underlie some of their biological functions (Webb et al.,
2009a). For example, recent reports indicate that prolyl hydroxylases play significant HIF-independent roles in cancer. PHD2
suppresses growth of xenograft tumors in a HIF- and, surprisingly, hydroxylase-independent fashion (Chan et al., 2009).
PHD1/EglN2, on the other hand, promotes tumor growth through
HIF-independent regulation of Cyclin D1 (Zhang et al., 2009). It is
also important to note that all 2-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxygenases, including but not limited to PHDs, require O2 for their
enzymatic activity and therefore could potentially mediate HIFindependent responses to hypoxia.
These observations emphasize that hypoxic adaptations are
mediated by more than the HIF response. Hypoxia can activate
many distinct pathways and influence less-established branches
of the canonical PHD/pVHL/HIFa pathway.
HIF-Targeted Therapies
Many insights from HIF biology are being translated into clinical
applications and, in particular, drug discovery. The most
advanced HIF pathway-targeted pharmaceuticals in terms of
clinical development, to date, are PHD inhibitors. These
compounds, FG-2216 and FG-4592, are being evaluated for
treatment of anemia and are currently in phase I and II clinical trials
(http://clinicaltrials.gov/ identifiers NCT00456053, NCT0076
1657, NCT00978198, and NCT00978198).
HIF Activators
In addition to PHD inhibition, several strategies to promote HIF1a
activity and angiogenesis are in development for use in ischemic
disease. In models of hindlimb ischemia, adenoviral delivery of
constituitively active HIF1a has shown promise when administered alone or in combination with bone marrow-derived angiogenic cells (Bosch-Marce et al., 2007; Rey et al., 2009). HIF1a
adenoviral therapy has also shown benefit in limb ischemia
models in aged and diabetic mice (Bosch-Marce et al., 2007;
Sarkar et al., 2009). These findings are significant if one
considers that two large patient populations afflicted by atherosclerosis and associated ischemic diseases are diabetics and
the elderly (Beckman et al., 2002).
Similar approaches with hybrid HIF1a/VP16 have been used in
rabbit and diabetic rat models of limb ischemia and progressed
through phase I and II clinical studies in patients with severe
peripheral arterial disease (Vincent et al., 2000; Rajagopalan
et al., 2007; Kajiwara et al., 2009). These interventions have
also been applied to other ischemic injuries such as wound healing and myocardial infarction (Liu et al., 2008; Mace et al., 2007;
Heinl-Green et al., 2005). In addition to gene therapy, PHD inhibitors have also shown utility in wound healing in diabetic animals
(Botusan et al., 2008).
Overall, these findings indicate that HIF activating therapies
are effective in preclinical studies of ischemia and merit investigation in patients suffering from ischemic disease.
HIF Inhibitors
Transcription factors have historically been considered undruggable targets. However, interest in HIF inhibition as a therapeutic
304 Molecular Cell 40, October 22, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc.

strategy remains high (Semenza, 2007). A high-throughput
screen of FDA-approved drugs for anti-HIF activity revealed
that digoxin and other cardiac glycosides inhibit HIFa translation
and subcutaneous xenograft growth (Zhang et al., 2008). Importantly, HIFa inhibition is independent of digoxin’s known effect
on the Na+/K+ ATPase but necessary for its tumor suppressive
effect (Zhang et al., 2008). Other HIF inhibitors identified in similar
screens include the antiseptic dye acriflavine, and anthracyclines such as doxorubicin and daunorubicin (Lee et al., 2009a,
2009b). Screening for HIF inhibitors among approved agents
means that identified compounds, although pharmacologically
well studied and suitable for human use, can be presumed to
exhibit HIF-independent effects stemming from their original
therapeutic purposes. Therefore, for these drugs to be used in
targeted HIF therapy, it will be crucial to demonstrate that HIF
repression is sufficient for their intended biological effects.
Another challenge in HIF targeting involves the overlapping but
distinct biological roles of HIFa subunits. Compounds that
promote the binding of IRP1 to the 50 UTR of HIF2a mRNA
decrease HIF2a hypoxic induction, but also repress HIF1a
synthesis via an independent mechanism (Zimmer et al., 2008).
An RNA antagonist of HIF1a, EZN-2968, reduces HIF1a protein
and target gene expression in vitro and in vivo, but not that of
HIF2a, and is being evaluated in a phase I clinical trial (Patnaik
et al., 2009; Greenberger et al., 2008). We expect that RNAi
will play a key role in targeted HIF therapy once effective and
selective delivery methods become available.
With the emerging view of the importance of HIF1a and HIF2a
in disease, there is a largely unmet need for specific HIF inhibitors. While combined inhibition of HIFa isoforms will be appropriate in certain disease situations, HIF1a- or HIF2a-specific
therapies may be preferable in other scenarios.
Synthetic Lethality with VHL Deficiency
In many cancers, reactivating tumor suppressors could provide
a therapeutic benefit. However, it is challenging to design drugs
for this purpose. Several groups, therefore, have adopted
a synthetic lethal screening approach to overcome this hurdle.
Two genes are synthetically lethal if inhibition of either gene is
compatible with viability, but inhibition of both leads to cell death.
In ccRCC, several groups have screened for genes which are
synthetically lethal with VHL (Bommi-Reddy et al., 2008; Turcotte
et al., 2008). One group screened a shRNA library targeting
various kinases and identified several targets, such as CDK6,
for which chemical inhibitors already exist (Bommi-Reddy
et al., 2008). Another screen employed a drug library and identified a compound, STF-62247, which promoted autophagic cell
death in VHL-deficient cells (Turcotte et al., 2008). Surprisingly,
in several cases, VHL-replete cells with stable HIF2a expression
were viable in the presence of drug- or kinase-specific shRNA,
suggesting the observed death in VHL-deficient cells is HIF independent (Turcotte et al., 2008; Bommi-Reddy et al., 2008). In
sum, these screens implicate new molecular targets and
compounds in the treatment of VHL-deficient ccRCC.
Conclusion
Hypoxic stress is characteristic of many pathological settings,
and the HIFs direct critical adaptations to enable cells, tissues,
and organisms to survive and thrive in these conditions. Recent

Molecular Cell

Review
work has revealed new mechanisms of HIF induction, including
PHD-dependent and -independent modes of regulation, as
well as new effects of activating the HIF response in development and disease. In some cases, these responses promote
disease progression, while in others, HIF responses are a part
of disease recovery. Recent evidence has also highlighted the
common and distinguishing features between HIF1a- and
HIF2a-mediated responses in cancer, tissue ischemia, and
inflammatory disease. A deeper understanding of how HIFa isoforms are uniquely regulated and how they can be selectively
modulated will be essential for translating our current knowledge
of the HIF pathway to clinical settings.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Brian Keith and other members of our laboratory for helpful discussions, and Kelly Clark for assistance with figure preparation. We apologize to
our colleagues whose work has not been directly cited because of space limitations.
REFERENCES
Adams, L., and Lindor, K. (2007). Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Ann. Epidemiol. 17, 863–869.
Aghili, M., Zahedi, F., and Rafiee, E. (2009). Hydroxyglutaric aciduria and
malignant brain tumor: a case report and literature review. J. Neurooncol.
91, 233–236.
An, W.G., Kanekal, M., Simon, M.C., Maltepe, E., Blagosklonny, M.V., and
Neckers, L.M. (1998). Stabilization of wild-type p53 by hypoxia-inducible
factor 1. Nature 392, 405–408.
Aragones, J., Schneider, M., Van Geyte, K., Fraisl, P., Dresselaers, T.,
Mazzone, M., Dirkx, R., Zacchigna, S., Lemieux, H., Jeoung, N.H., et al.
(2008). Deficiency or inhibition of oxygen sensor Phd1 induces hypoxia tolerance by reprogramming basal metabolism. Nat. Genet. 40, 170–180.
Arany, Z., Foo, S., Ma, Y., Ruas, J.L., Bommi-Reddy, A., Girnun, G., Cooper,
M., Laznik, D., Chinsomboon, J., Rangwala, S.M., et al. (2008). HIF-independent regulation of VEGF and angiogenesis by the transcriptional coactivator
PGC-1a. Nature 451, 1008–1012.
Bakker, W.J., Harris, I.S., and Mak, T.W. (2007). FOXO3a is activated in
response to hypoxic stress and inhibits HIF1-induced apoptosis via regulation
of CITED2. Mol. Cell 28, 941–953.
Baranova, O., Miranda, L.F., Pichiule, P., Dragatsis, I., Johnson, R.S., and
Chavez, J.C. (2007). Neuron-specific inactivation of the hypoxia inducible
factor 1{alpha} increases brain injury in a mouse model of transient focal cerebral ischemia. J. Neurosci. 27, 6320–6332.

promotes p53 pathway activity, tumor cell death, and radiation responses.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 14391–14396.
Blagosklonny, M.V., An, W.G., Romanova, L.Y., Trepel, J., Fojo, T., and
Neckers, L. (1998). p53 inhibits hypoxia-inducible factor-stimulated transcription. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 11995–11998.
Bommi-Reddy, A., Almeciga, I., Sawyer, J., Geisen, C., Li, W., Harlow, E.,
Kaelin, W.G., and Grueneberg, D.A. (2008). Kinase requirements in human
cells: III. Altered kinase requirements in VHLÀ/À cancer cells detected in a pilot
synthetic lethal screen. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105, 16484–16489.
Bosch-Marce, M., Okuyama, H., Wesley, J.B., Sarkar, K., Kimura, H., Liu, Y.V.,
Zhang, H., Strazza, M., Rey, S., Savino, L., et al. (2007). Effects of aging and
hypoxia-inducible factor-1 activity on angiogenic cell mobilization and
recovery of perfusion after limb ischemia. Circ. Res. 101, 1310–1318.
Bostrom, P., Magnusson, B., Svensson, P., Wiklund, O., Boren, J., Carlsson,
L.M.S., Stahlman, M., Olofsson, S., and Hulten, L.M. (2006). Hypoxia converts
human macrophages into triglyceride-loaded foam cells. Arterioscler. Thromb.
Vasc. Biol. 26, 1871–1876.
Botusan, I.R., Sunkari, V.G., Savu, O., Catrina, A.I., Gru¨nler, J., Lindberg, S.,
Pereira, T., Yla¨-Herttuala, S., Poellinger, L., Brismar, K., et al. (2008). Stabilization of HIF-1a is critical to improve wound healing in diabetic mice. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 105, 19426–19431.
Boutin, A.T., Weidemann, A., Fu, Z., Mesropian, L., Gradin, K., Jamora, C.,
Wiesener, M., Eckardt, K., Koch, C.J., Ellies, L.G., et al. (2008). Epidermal
sensing of oxygen is essential for systemic hypoxic response. Cell 133,
223–234.
Brugarolas, J., and Kaelin, W.G., Jr. (2004). Dysregulation of HIF and VEGF is
a unifying feature of the familial hamartoma syndromes. Cancer Cell 6, 7–10.
Buchberger, A., Bukau, B., and Sommer, T. (2010). Protein quality control in
the cytosol and the endoplasmic reticulum: brothers in arms. Mol. Cell 40,
this issue, 238–252.
Calabrese, C., Poppleton, H., Kocak, M., Hogg, T.L., Fuller, C., Hamner, B.,
Oh, E.Y., Gaber, M.W., Finklestein, D., Allen, M., et al. (2007). A perivascular
niche for brain tumor stem cells. Cancer Cell 11, 69–82.
Carbia-Nagashima, A., Gerez, J., Perez-Castro, C., Paez-Pereda, M., Silberstein, S., Stalla, G.K., Holsboer, F., and Arzt, E. (2007). RSUME, a small
RWD-containing protein, enhances SUMO conjugation and stabilizes HIF-1
[alpha] during hypoxia. Cell 131, 309–323.
Carmeliet, P. (2005). Angiogenesis in life, disease and medicine. Nature 438,
932–936.
Chan, D.A., Kawahara, T.L., Sutphin, P.D., Chang, H.Y., Chi, J., and Giaccia,
A.J. (2009). Tumor vasculature is regulated by PHD2-mediated angiogenesis
and bone marrow-derived cell recruitment. Cancer Cell 15, 527–538.
Cheng, J., Kang, X., Zhang, S., and Yeh, E.T. (2007). SUMO-specific protease
1 is essential for stabilization of HIF1alpha during hypoxia. Cell 131, 584–595.

Basner, R.C. (2007). Continuous positive airway pressure for obstructive sleep
apnea. N. Engl. J. Med. 356, 1751–1758.

Covello, K.L., and Simon, M.C. (2004). HIFs, hypoxia, and vascular development. Curr. Top. Dev. Biol. 62, 37–54.

Beall, C.M., Cavalleri, G.L., Deng, L., Elston, R.C., Gao, Y., Knight, J., Li, C., Li,
J.C., Liang, Y., McCormack, M., et al. (2010). Natural selection on EPAS1
(HIF2a) associated with low hemoglobin concentration in Tibetan highlanders.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107, 11459–11464.

Cramer, T., Yamanishi, Y., Clausen, B.E., Fo¨rster, I., Pawlinski, R., Mackman,
N., Haase, V.H., Jaenisch, R., Corr, M., Nizet, V., et al. (2003). HIF-1[alpha] is
essential for myeloid cell-mediated inflammation. Cell 112, 645–657.

Beckman, J.A., Creager, M.A., and Libby, P. (2002). Diabetes and atherosclerosis: epidemiology, pathophysiology, and management. JAMA 287,
2570–2581.

Cummins, E.P., Berra, E., Comerford, K.M., Ginouves, A., Fitzgerald, K.T.,
Seeballuck, F., Godson, C., Nielsen, J.E., Moynagh, P., Pouyssegur, J.,
et al. (2006). Prolyl hydroxylase-1 negatively regulates IkB kinase-b, giving
insight into hypoxia-induced NFkB activity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103,
18154–18159.

Bernardi, R., Guernah, I., Jin, D., Grisendi, S., Alimonti, A., Teruya-Feldstein, J.,
Cordon-Cardo, C., Celeste Simon, M., Rafii, S., and Pandolfi, P.P. (2006). PML
inhibits HIF-1[alpha] translation and neoangiogenesis through repression of
mTOR. Nature 442, 779–785.

Dang, L., White, D.W., Gross, S., Bennett, B.D., Bittinger, M.A., Driggers, E.M.,
Fantin, V.R., Jang, H.G., Jin, S., Keenan, M.C., et al. (2009). Cancer-associated
IDH1 mutations produce 2-hydroxyglutarate. Nature 462, 739–744.

Bertout, J.A., Patel, S.A., and Simon, M.C. (2008). The impact of O2 availability
on human cancer. Nat. Rev. Cancer 8, 967–975.

Denu, J.M. (2003). Linking chromatin function with metabolic networks: Sir2
family of NAD+-dependent deacetylases. Trends Biochem. Sci. 28, 41–48.

Bertout, J.A., Majmundar, A.J., Gordan, J.D., Lam, J.C., Ditsworth, D., Keith,
B., Brown, E.J., Nathanson, K.L., and Simon, M.C. (2009). HIF2 inhibition

Dioum, E.M., Clarke, S.L., Ding, K., Repa, J.J., and Garcia, J.A. (2008). HIF-2haploinsufficient mice have blunted retinal neovascularization due to impaired

Molecular Cell 40, October 22, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc. 305

Molecular Cell

Review
expression of a proangiogenic gene battery. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 49,
2714–2720.

leukemia with isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 and 2 mutations. J. Exp. Med.
207, 339–344.

Dioum, E.M., Chen, R., Alexander, M.S., Zhang, Q., Hogg, R.T., Gerard, R.D.,
and Garcia, J.A. (2009). Regulation of hypoxia-inducible factor 2 signaling by
the stress-responsive deacetylase sirtuin 1. Science 324, 1289–1293.

Haigis, M.C., and Sinclair, D.A. (2010). Mammalian sirtuins: biological insights
and disease relevance. Annu. Rev. Pathol. 5, 253–295.

Du, R., Lu, K.V., Petritsch, C., Liu, P., Ganss, R., Passegue´, E., Song, H.,
VandenBerg, S., Johnson, R.S., and Werb, Z. (2008). HIF1a induces the
recruitment of bone marrow-derived vascular modulatory cells to regulate
tumor angiogenesis and invasion. Cancer Cell 13, 206–220.
Elvert, G., Kappel, A., Heidenreich, R., Englmeier, U., Lanz, S., Acker, T.,
Rauter, M., Plate, K., Sieweke, M., Breier, G., et al. (2003). Cooperative interaction of hypoxia-inducible factor-2a (HIF-2a) and Ets-1 in the transcriptional
activation of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 (Flk-1). J. Biol.
Chem. 278, 7520–7530.
Ema, M., Taya, S., Yokotani, N., Sogawa, K., Matsuda, Y., and Fujii-Kuriyama,
Y. (1997). A novel bHLH-PAS factor with close sequence similarity to hypoxiainducible factor 1a regulates the VEGF expression and is potentially involved in
lung and vascular development. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94, 4273–4278.
Erler, J., Bennewith, K., Cox, T., Lang, G., Bird, D., Koong, A., Le, Q., and Giaccia, A. (2009). Hypoxia-induced lysyl oxidase is a critical mediator of bone
marrow cell recruitment to form the premetastatic niche. Cancer Cell 15,
35–44.
Fandrey, J. (2004). Oxygen-dependent and tissue-specific regulation of erythropoietin gene expression. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 286,
R977–R988.
Fang, H., Hughes, R., Murdoch, C., Coffelt, S.B., Biswas, S.K., Harris, A.L.,
Johnson, R.S., Imityaz, H.Z., Simon, M.C., Fredlund, E., et al. (2009).
Hypoxia-inducible factors 1 and 2 are important transcriptional effectors in
primary macrophages experiencing hypoxia. Blood 114, 844–859.
Franovic, A., Holterman, C.E., Payette, J., and Lee, S. (2009). Human cancers
converge at the HIF-2 oncogenic axis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106,
21306–21311.
Frede, S., Stockmann, C., Freitag, P., and Fandrey, J. (2006). Bacterial lipopolysaccharide induces HIF-1 activation in human monocytes via p44/42
MAPK and NF-kB. Biochem. J. 396, 517–527.
Furlow, P.W., Percy, M.J., Sutherland, S., Bierl, C., McMullin, M.F., Master,
S.R., Lappin, T.R.J., and Lee, F.S. (2009). Erythrocytosis-associated HIF-2a
mutations demonstrate a critical role for residues C-terminal to the hydroxylacceptor proline. J. Biol. Chem. 284, 9050–9058.
Gerald, D., Berra, E., Frapart, Y.M., Chan, D.A., Giaccia, A.J., Mansuy, D.,
Pouyssegur, J., Yaniv, M., and Mechta-Grigoriou, F. (2004). JunD reduces
tumor angiogenesis by protecting cells from oxidative stress. Cell 118,
781–794.
Gnarra, J.R., Ward, J.M., Porter, F.D., Wagner, J.R., Devor, D.E., Grinberg, A.,
Emmert-Buck, M.R., Westphal, H., Klausner, R.D., and Linehan, W.M. (1997).
Defective placental vasculogenesis causes embryonic lethality in VHL-deficient mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94, 9102–9107.
Gordan, J.D., Bertout, J.A., Hu, C., Diehl, J.A., and Simon, M.C. (2007a). HIF-2
[alpha] promotes hypoxic cell proliferation by enhancing c-Myc transcriptional
activity. Cancer Cell 11, 335–347.
Gordan, J.D., Thompson, C.B., and Simon, M.C. (2007b). HIF and c-Myc:
sibling rivals for control of cancer cell metabolism and proliferation. Cancer
Cell 12, 108–113.
Gordan, J., Lal, P., Dondeti, V., Letrero, R., Parekh, K., Oquendo, C., Greenberg, R., Flaherty, K., Rathmell, W., Keith, B., et al. (2008). HIF-a effects on
c-Myc distinguish two subtypes of sporadic VHL-deficient clear cell renal
carcinoma. Cancer Cell 14, 435–446.
Greenberger, L.M., Horak, I.D., Filpula, D., Sapra, P., Westergaard, M.,
Frydenlund, H.F., Albaek, C., Schroder, H., and Orum, H. (2008). A RNA antagonist of hypoxia-inducible factor-1, EZN-2968, inhibits tumor cell growth. Mol.
Cancer Ther. 7, 3598–3608.
Gross, S., Cairns, R.A., Minden, M.D., Driggers, E.M., Bittinger, M.A., Jang,
H.G., Sasaki, M., Jin, S., Schenkein, D.P., Su, S.M., et al. (2010). Cancer-associated metabolite 2-hydroxyglutarate accumulates in acute myelogenous

306 Molecular Cell 40, October 22, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc.

Heinl-Green, A., Radke, P.W., Munkonge, F.M., Frass, O., Zhu, J., Vincent, K.,
Geddes, D.M., and Alton, E.W. (2005). The efficacy of a ‘master switch gene’
HIF-1a in a porcine model of chronic myocardial ischaemia. Eur. Heart J. 26,
1327–1332.
Helton, R., Cui, J., Scheel, J.R., Ellison, J.A., Ames, C., Gibson, C., Blouw, B.,
Ouyang, L., Dragatsis, I., Zeitlin, S., et al. (2005). Brain-specific knock-out of
hypoxia-inducible factor-1{alpha} reduces rather than increases hypoxicischemic damage. J. Neurosci. 25, 4099–4107.
Herr, B., Zhou, J., Werno, C., Menrad, H., Namgaladze, D., Weigert, A., Dehne,
N., and Brune, B. (2009). The supernatant of apoptotic cells causes transcriptional activation of hypoxia-inducible factor-1{alpha} in macrophages via
sphingosine-1-phosphate and transforming growth factor-{beta}. Blood 114,
2140–2148.
Hu, C., Wang, L., Chodosh, L.A., Keith, B., and Simon, M.C. (2003). Differential
roles of hypoxia-inducible factor 1{alpha} (HIF-1{alpha}) and HIF-2{alpha} in
hypoxic gene regulation. Mol. Cell. Biol. 23, 9361–9374.
Huang, B., Wu, P., Bowker-Kinley, M.M., and Harris, R.A. (2002). Regulation of
pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase expression by peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-a ligands, glucocorticoids, and insulin. Diabetes 51, 276–283.
Huang, X., Ding, L., Bennewith, K.L., Tong, R.T., Welford, S.M., Ang, K.K.,
Story, M., Le, Q., and Giaccia, A.J. (2009). Hypoxia-inducible mir-210 regulates normoxic gene expression involved in tumor initiation. Mol. Cell 35,
856–867.
Huss, J.M., Levy, F.H., and Kelly, D.P. (2001). Hypoxia inhibits the peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor a/ retinoid X receptor gene regulatory pathway
in cardiac myocytes. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 27605–27612.
Imtiyaz, H., Williams, E., Hickey, M., Patel, S., Durham, A., Yuan, L.,
Hammond, R., Gimotty, P., Keith, B., and Simon, M. (2010). Hypoxia inducible
factor 2alpha regulates macrophage function in mouse models of acute and
tumor inflammation. J. Clin. Invest. 120, 2699–2714.
Isaacs, J.S., Jung, Y., Mimnaugh, E.G., Martinez, A., Cuttitta, F., and Neckers,
L.M. (2002). Hsp90 regulates a von Hippel Lindau-independent hypoxiainducible factor-1a-degradative pathway. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 29936–29944.
Jain, R.K. (2005). Normalization of tumor vasculature: an emerging concept in
antiangiogenic therapy. Science 307, 58–62.
Jantsch, J., Chakravortty, D., Turza, N., Prechtel, A.T., Buchholz, B., Gerlach,
R.G., Volke, M., Glasner, J., Warnecke, C., Wiesener, M.S., et al. (2008).
Hypoxia and hypoxia-inducible factor-1{alpha} modulate lipopolysaccharide-induced dendritic cell activation and function. J. Immunol. 180,
4697–4705.
Jiang, J., Xia, X., Xu, H., Xiong, Y., Song, W., Xiong, S., and Li, Y. (2009). Inhibition of retinal neovascularization by gene transfer of small interfering RNA
targeting HIF-1alpha and VEGF. J. Cell. Physiol. 218, 66–74.
Jungermann, K. (1988). Metabolic zonation of liver parenchyma. Semin. Liver
Dis. 8, 329–341.
Kaelin, W.G. (2005). ROS: really involved in oxygen sensing. Cell Metab. 1,
357–358.
Kaelin, W.G. (2008). The von Hippel-Lindau tumour suppressor protein: O2
sensing and cancer. Nat. Rev. Cancer 8, 865–873.
Kaelin, W.G., and Ratcliffe, P.J. (2008). Oxygen sensing by metazoans: the
central role of the HIF hydroxylase pathway. Mol. Cell 30, 393–402.
Kaidi, A., Williams, A.C., and Paraskeva, C. (2007). Interaction between b-catenin and HIF-1 promotes cellular adaptation to hypoxia. Nat. Cell Biol. 9,
210–217.
Kajiwara, H., Luo, Z., Belanger, A.J., Urabe, A., Vincent, K.A., Akita, G.Y.,
Cheng, S.H., Mochizuki, S., Gregory, R.J., and Jiang, C. (2009). A hypoxic
inducible factor-1alpha hybrid enhances collateral development and reduces
vascular leakage in diabetic rats. J. Gene Med. 11, 390–400.

Molecular Cell

Review
Kawanaka, T., Kubo, A., Ikushima, H., Sano, T., Takegawa, Y., and Nishitani,
H. (2008). Prognostic significance of HIF-2alpha expression on tumor infiltrating macrophages in patients with uterine cervical cancer undergoing radiotherapy. J. Med. Invest. 55, 78–86.
Keith, B., and Simon, M. (2007). Hypoxia-inducible factors, stem cells, and
cancer. Cell 129, 465–472.
Kelly, B.D., Hackett, S.F., Hirota, K., Oshima, Y., Cai, Z., Berg-Dixon, S.,
Rowan, A., Yan, Z., Campochiaro, P.A., and Semenza, G.L. (2003). Cell
type-specific regulation of angiogenic growth factor gene expression and
induction of angiogenesis in nonischemic tissue by a constitutively active
form of hypoxia-inducible factor 1. Circ. Res. 93, 1074–1081.
Kim, W.Y., Perera, S., Zhou, B., Carretero, J., Yeh, J.J., Heathcote, S.A.,
Jackson, A.L., Nikolinakos, P., Ospina, B., Naumov, G., et al. (2009). HIF2a
cooperates with RAS to promote lung tumorigenesis in mice. J. Clin. Invest.
119, 2160–2170.
King, A., Selak, M.A., and Gottlieb, E. (2006). Succinate dehydrogenase and
fumarate hydratase: linking mitochondrial dysfunction and cancer. Oncogene
25, 4675–4682.
Klimova, T., and Chandel, N.S. (2008). Mitochondrial complex III regulates
hypoxic activation of HIF. Cell Death Differ. 15, 660–666.
Lee, F.S. (2008). Genetic causes of erythrocytosis and the oxygen-sensing
pathway. Blood Rev. 22, 321–332.
Lee, K., Qian, D.Z., Rey, S., Wei, H., Liu, J.O., and Semenza, G.L. (2009a).
Anthracycline chemotherapy inhibits HIF-1 transcriptional activity and
tumor-induced mobilization of circulating angiogenic cells. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 106, 2353–2358.
Lee, K., Zhang, H., Qian, D.Z., Rey, S., Liu, J.O., and Semenza, G.L. (2009b).
Acriflavine inhibits HIF-1 dimerization, tumor growth, and vascularization.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 17910–17915.
Lee, J.S., Kim, Y., Kim, I.S., Kim, B., Choi, H.J., Lee, J.M., Shin, H.R., Kim, J.H.,
Kim, J., Seo, S., et al. (2010). Negative regulation of hypoxic responses via
induced reptin methylation. Mol. Cell 39, 71–85.
Leek, R.D., Talks, K.L., Pezzella, F., Turley, H., Campo, L., Brown, N.S.,
Bicknell, R., Taylor, M., Gatter, K.C., and Harris, A.L. (2002). Relation of
hypoxia-inducible factor-2{alpha} (HIF-2{alpha}) expression in tumor-infiltrative macrophages to tumor angiogenesis and the oxidative thymidine phosphorylase pathway in human breast cancer. Cancer Res. 62, 1326–1329.
Lewis, C.E., and Pollard, J.W. (2006). Distinct role of macrophages in different
tumor microenvironments. Cancer Res. 66, 605–612.
Li, Z., Bao, S., Wu, Q., Wang, H., Eyler, C., Sathornsumetee, S., Shi, Q., Cao,
Y., Lathia, J., and McLendon, R.E. (2009). Hypoxia-inducible factors regulate
tumorigenic capacity of glioma stem cells. Cancer Cell 15, 501–513.

EMT by destabilizing HIF-1a and inhibiting VEGF-mediated snail nuclear localization: implications for Gleason grading. Cancer Cell 17, 319–332.
Manalo, D.J., Rowan, A., Lavoie, T., Natarajan, L., Kelly, B.D., Ye, S.Q., Garcia,
J.G.N., and Semenza, G.L. (2005). Transcriptional regulation of vascular endothelial cell responses to hypoxia by HIF-1. Blood 105, 659–669.
Maynard, M., Evans, A., Shi, W., Kim, W., Liu, F., and Ohh, M. (2007). Dominant-negative HIF-3a4 suppresses VHL-null renal cell carcinoma progression.
Cell Cycle 6, 2810–2816.
Mazumdar, J., Hickey, M., Pant, D., Durham, A., Sweet-Cordero, A., Jacks, T.,
Chodosh, L., Kissil, J., Simon, M., and Keith, B. (2010). HIF-2alpha deletion
promotes Kras-driven lung tumor development. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA,
in press.
Mazzone, M., Dettori, D., Leite de Oliveira, R., Loges, S., Schmidt, T., Jonckx,
B., Tian, Y., Lanahan, A.A., Pollard, P., and Ruiz de Almodovar, C. (2009).
Heterozygous deficiency of PHD2 restores tumor oxygenation and inhibits
metastasis via endothelial normalization. Cell 136, 839–851.
Moeller, B.J., Dreher, M.R., Rabbani, Z.N., Schroeder, T., Cao, Y., Li, C.Y., and
Dewhirst, M.W. (2005). Pleiotropic effects of HIF-1 blockade on tumor radiosensitivity. Cancer Cell 8, 99–110.
Mole, D.R., Blancher, C., Copley, R.R., Pollard, P.J., Gleadle, J.M., Ragoussis,
J., and Ratcliffe, P.J. (2009). Genome-wide association of hypoxia-inducible
factor (HIF)-1 and HIF-2 DNA binding with expression profiling of hypoxiainducible transcripts. J. Biol. Chem. 284, 16767–16775.
Mottet, D., Dumont, V., Deccache, Y., Demazy, C., Ninane, N., Raes, M., and
Michiels, C. (2003). Regulation of hypoxia-inducible factor-1a protein level
during hypoxic conditions by the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt/glycogen
synthase kinase 3b pathway in HepG2 cells. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 31277–31285.
Muoio, D.M., and Koves, T.R. (2007). Skeletal muscle adaptation to fatty acid
depends on coordinated actions of the PPARs and PGC1a: implications for
metabolic disease. Appl. Physiol. Nutr. Metab. 32, 874–883.
Murdoch, C., Giannoudis, A., and Lewis, C.E. (2004). Mechanisms regulating
the recruitment of macrophages into hypoxic areas of tumors and other
ischemic tissues. Blood 104, 2224–2234.
Nanduri, J., Wang, N., Yuan, G., Khan, S.A., Souvannakitti, D., Peng, Y.,
Kumar, G.K., Garcia, J.A., and Prabhakar, N.R. (2009). Intermittent hypoxia
degrades HIF-2a via calpains resulting in oxidative stress: implications for
recurrent apnea-induced morbidities. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106,
1199–1204.
Nizet, V., and Johnson, R.S. (2009). Interdependence of hypoxic and innate
immune responses. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 9, 609–617.

Lim, J., Lee, Y., Chun, Y., Chen, J., Kim, J., and Park, J. (2010). Sirtuin 1 modulates cellular responses to hypoxia by deacetylating hypoxia-inducible factor
1. Mol. Cell 38, 864–878.

Patnaik, A., Chiorean, E.G., Tolcher, A., Papadopoulos, K., Beeram, M., Kee,
D., Waddell, M., Gilles, E., and Buchbinder, A. (2009). EZN-2968, a novel
hypoxia-inducible factor-1{alpha} (HIF-1{alpha}) messenger ribonucleic acid
(mRNA) antagonist: results of a phase I, pharmacokinetic (PK), dose-escalation study of daily administration in patients (pts) with advanced malignancies.
J. Clin. Oncol. 27, 2564.

Liu, L., Marti, G.P., Wei, X., Zhang, X., Zhang, H., Liu, Y.V., Nastai, M.,
Semenza, G.L., and Harmon, J.W. (2008). Age-dependent impairment of
HIF-1alpha expression in diabetic mice: correction with electroporation-facilitated gene therapy increases wound healing, angiogenesis, and circulating
angiogenic cells. J. Cell. Physiol. 217, 319–327.

Peng, Y., Yuan, G., Ramakrishnan, D., Sharma, S.D., Bosch-Marce, M.,
Kumar, G.K., Semenza, G.L., and Prabhakar, N.R. (2006). Heterozygous
HIF-1a deficiency impairs carotid body-mediated systemic responses and
reactive oxygen species generation in mice exposed to intermittent hypoxia.
J. Physiol. 577, 705–716.

Luo, W., Zhong, J., Chang, R., Hu, H., Pandey, A., and Semenza, G.L. (2009).
Hsp70 and CHIP selectively mediate ubiquitination and degradation of
hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1 but not HIF-2. J. Biol. Chem. 285, 3651–3663.

Peyssonnaux, C., Datta, V., Cramer, T., Doedens, A., Theodorakis, E.A., Gallo,
R.L., Hurtado-Ziola, N., Nizet, V., and Johnson, R.S. (2005). HIF-1a expression
regulates the bactericidal capacity of phagocytes. J. Clin. Invest. 115,
1806–1815.

Mace, K.A., Yu, D.H., Paydar, K.Z., Boudreau, N., and Young, D.M. (2007).
Sustained expression of Hif-1alpha in the diabetic environment promotes
angiogenesis and cutaneous wound repair. Wound Repair Regen. 15,
636–645.

Peyssonnaux, C., Cejudo-Martin, P., Doedens, A., Zinkernagel, A.S., Johnson,
R.S., and Nizet, V. (2007). Cutting edge: essential role of hypoxia inducible
factor-1{alpha} in development of lipopolysaccharide-induced sepsis. J. Immunol. 178, 7516–7519.

Mahon, P.C., Hirota, K., and Semenza, G.L. (2001). FIH-1: a novel protein that
interacts with HIF-1a and VHL to mediate repression of HIF-1 transcriptional
activity. Genes Dev. 15, 2675–2686.

Picard, F., and Auwerx, J. (2002). PPARg and glucose homeostasis. Annu.
Rev. Nutr. 22, 167–197.

Mak, P., Leav, I., Pursell, B., Bae, D., Yang, X., Taglienti, C.A., Gouvin, L.M.,
Sharma, V.M., and Mercurio, A.M. (2010). ERb impedes prostate cancer

Pietras, A., Hansford, L.M., Johnsson, A.S., Bridges, E., Sjolund, J., Gisselsson, D., Rehn, M., Beckman, S., Noguera, R., Navarro, S., et al. (2009).

Molecular Cell 40, October 22, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc. 307

Molecular Cell

Review
HIF-2 maintains an undifferentiated state in neural crest-like human neuroblastoma tumor-initiating cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 16805–16810.
Qi, J., Nakayama, K., Cardiff, R.D., Borowsky, A.D., Kaul, K., Williams, R.,
Krajewski, S., Mercola, D., Carpenter, P.M., Bowtell, D., et al. (2010). Siah2dependent concerted activity of HIF and FoxA2 regulates formation of neuroendocrine phenotype and neuroendocrine prostate tumors. Cancer Cell 18,
23–38.
Rajagopalan, S., Olin, J., Deitcher, S., Pieczek, A., Laird, J., Grossman, P.M.,
Goldman, C.K., McEllin, K., Kelly, R., and Chronos, N. (2007). Use of a constitutively active hypoxia-inducible factor-1{alpha} transgene as a therapeutic
strategy in no-option critical limb ischemia patients: phase I dose-escalation
experience. Circulation 115, 1234–1243.
Ramirez-Bergeron, D.L., Runge, A., Adelman, D.M., Gohil, M., and Simon,
M.C. (2006). HIF-dependent hematopoietic factors regulate the development
of the embryonic vasculature. Dev. Cell 11, 81–92.
Rankin, E.B., Rha, J., Selak, M.A., Unger, T.L., Keith, B., Liu, Q., and Haase,
V.H. (2009). Hypoxia-inducible factor 2 regulates hepatic lipid metabolism.
Mol. Cell. Biol. 29, 4527–4538.
Ratan, R., Siddiq, A., Smirnova, N., Karpisheva, K., Haskew-Layton, R., McConoughey, S., Langley, B., Estevez, A., Huerta, P., Volpe, B., et al. (2007). Harnessing hypoxic adaptation to prevent, treat, and repair stroke. J. Mol. Med.
85, 1331–1338.
Raval, R.R., Lau, K.W., Tran, M.G.B., Sowter, H.M., Mandriota, S.J., Li, J.,
Pugh, C.W., Maxwell, P.H., Harris, A.L., and Ratcliffe, P.J. (2005). Contrasting
properties of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) and HIF-2 in von Hippel-Lindau-associated renal cell carcinoma. Mol. Cell. Biol. 25, 5675–5686.
Ravi, R., Mookerjee, B., Bhujwalla, Z.M., Sutter, C.H., Artemov, D., Zeng, Q.,
Dillehay, L.E., Madan, A., Semenza, G.L., and Bedi, A. (2000). Regulation of
tumor angiogenesis by p53-induced degradation of hypoxia-inducible factor
1a. Genes Dev. 14, 34–44.
Rey, S., Lee, K., Wang, C.J., Gupta, K., Chen, S., McMillan, A., Bhise, N.,
Levchenko, A., and Semenza, G.L. (2009). Synergistic effect of HIF-1a gene
therapy and HIF-1-activated bone marrow-derived angiogenic cells in a mouse
model of limb ischemia. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 20399–20404.
Rius, J., Guma, M., Schachtrup, C., Akassoglou, K., Zinkernagel, A.S., Nizet,
V., Johnson, R.S., Haddad, G.G., and Karin, M. (2008). NF-kB links innate
immunity to the hypoxic response through transcriptional regulation of
HIF-1a. Nature 453, 807–811.
Roberts, A.M., Watson, I.R., Evans, A.J., Foster, D.A., Irwin, M.S., and Ohh, M.
(2009). Suppression of hypoxia-inducible factor 2{alpha} restores p53 activity
via Hdm2 and reverses chemoresistance of renal carcinoma cells. Cancer Res.
69, 9056–9064.
Sanchez, M., Galy, B., Muckenthaler, M.U., and Hentze, M.W. (2007). Ironregulatory proteins limit hypoxia-inducible factor-2a expression in iron
deficiency. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 14, 420–426.
Sano, M., Minamino, T., Toko, H., Miyauchi, H., Orimo, M., Qin, Y., Akazawa,
H., Tateno, K., Kayama, Y., Harada, M., et al. (2007). p53-induced inhibition of
Hif-1 causes cardiac dysfunction during pressure overload. Nature 446,
444–448.
Sarkar, K., Fox-Talbot, K., Steenbergen, C., Bosch-Marce´, M., and Semenza,
G.L. (2009). Adenoviral transfer of HIF-1a enhances vascular responses to critical limb ischemia in diabetic mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106,
18769–18774.
Schmid, T., Zhou, J., Khl, R., and Bru¨ne, B. (2004). p300 relieves p53-evoked
transcriptional repression of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1). Biochem. J.
380, 289–295.
Schneider, M., Van Geyte, K., Fraisl, P., Kiss, J., Aragone´s, J., Mazzone, M.,
Mairba¨url, H., De Bock, K., Jeoung, N.H., Mollenhauer, M., et al. (2010).
Loss or silencing of the PHD1 prolyl hydroxylase protects livers of mice against
ischemia/reperfusion injury. Gastroenterology 138, 1143–1154.
Semenza, G. (2007). Evaluation of HIF-1 inhibitors as anticancer agents. Drug
Discov. Today 12, 853–859.

308 Molecular Cell 40, October 22, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc.

Sendoel, A., Kohler, I., Fellmann, C., Lowe, S.W., and Hengartner, M.O. (2010).
HIF-1 antagonizes p53-mediated apoptosis through a secreted neuronal
tyrosinase. Nature 465, 577–583.
Sengupta, S., Peterson, T.R., and Sabatini, D.M. (2010). Regulation of the
mTor complex 1 by nutrients, growth factors and stress. Mol. Cell 40, this
issue, 310–322.
Shatrov, V.A., Sumbayev, V.V., Zhou, J., and Brune, B. (2003). Oxidized lowdensity lipoprotein (oxLDL) triggers hypoxia-inducible factor-1{alpha} (HIF-1
{alpha}) accumulation via redox-dependent mechanisms. Blood 101,
4847–4849.
Shohet, R., and Garcia, J. (2007). Keeping the engine primed: HIF factors as
key regulators of cardiac metabolism and angiogenesis during ischemia.
J. Mol. Med. 85, 1309–1315.
Simon, M. (2004). Siah proteins, HIF prolyl hydroxylases, and the physiological
response to hypoxia. Cell 117, 851–853.
Simon, M.C. (2006). Coming up for air: HIF-1 and mitochondrial oxygen
consumption. Cell Metab. 3, 150–151.
Simonson, T.S., Yang, Y., Huff, C.D., Yun, H., Qin, G., Witherspoon, D.J., Bai,
Z., Lorenzo, F.R., Xing, J., Jorde, L.B., et al. (2010). Genetic evidence for highaltitude adaptation in Tibet. Science 329, 72–75.
Skuli, N., Liu, L., Runge, A., Wang, T., Yuan, L., Patel, S., Iruela-Arispe, L.,
Simon, M.C., and Keith, B. (2009). Endothelial deletion of hypoxia-inducible
factor-2{alpha} (HIF-2{alpha}) alters vascular function and tumor angiogenesis. Blood 114, 469–477.
Spriggs, K.A., Bushell, M., and Willis, A.E. (2010). Translational regulation of
gene expression during conditions of cell stress. Mol. Cell 40, this issue,
228–237.
Stockmann, C., Doedens, A., Weidemann, A., Zhang, N., Takeda, N., Greenberg, J.I., Cheresh, D.A., and Johnson, R.S. (2008). Deletion of vascular endothelial growth factor in myeloid cells accelerates tumorigenesis. Nature 456,
814–818.
Sudarshan, S., Sourbier, C., Kong, H., Block, K., Romero, V.A.V., Yang, Y.,
Galindo, C., Mollapour, M., Scroggins, B., Goode, N., et al. (2009). Fumarate
hydratase deficiency in renal cancer induces glycolytic addiction and
hypoxia-inducible transcription factor 1{alpha} stabilization by glucosedependent generation of reactive oxygen species. Mol. Cell. Biol. 29,
4080–4090.
Taguchi, A., Yanagisawa, K., Tanaka, M., Cao, K., Matsuyama, Y., Goto, H.,
and Takahashi, T. (2008). Identification of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 as a novel
target for miR-17-92 microrna cluster. Cancer Res. 68, 5540–5545.
Takeda, K., Ho, V.C., Takeda, H., Duan, L., Nagy, A., and Fong, G. (2006).
Placental but not heart defects are associated with elevated hypoxia-inducible
factor {alpha} levels in mice lacking prolyl hydroxylase domain protein 2. Mol.
Cell. Biol. 26, 8336–8346.
Takeda, N., O’Dea, E.L., Doedens, A., Kim, J., Weidemann, A., Stockmann, C.,
Asagiri, M., Simon, M.C., Hoffmann, A., and Johnson, R.S. (2010). Differential
activation and antagonistic function of HIF-a isoforms in macrophages are
essential for NO homeostasis. Genes Dev. 24, 491–501.
Tang, N., Wang, L., Esko, J., Giordano, F.J., Huang, Y., Gerber, H., Ferrara, N.,
and Johnson, R.S. (2004). Loss of HIF-1alpha in endothelial cells disrupts
a hypoxia-driven VEGF autocrine loop necessary for tumorigenesis. Cancer
Cell 6, 485–495.
Thieu, V.T., Nguyen, E.T., McCarthy, B.P., Bruns, H.A., Kapur, R., Chang, C.,
and Kaplan, M.H. (2007). IL-4-stimulated NF-{kappa}B activity is required for
Stat6 DNA binding. J. Leukoc. Biol. 82, 370–379.
Tong, X., Zhao, F., and Thompson, C.B. (2009). The molecular determinants of
de novo nucleotide biosynthesis in cancer cells. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 19,
32–37.
Towler, M.C., and Hardie, D.G. (2007). AMP-activated protein kinase in metabolic control and insulin signaling. Circ. Res. 100, 328–341.
Turcotte, S., Chan, D.A., Sutphin, P.D., Hay, M.P., Denny, W.A., and Giaccia,
A.J. (2008). A molecule targeting vhl-deficient renal cell carcinoma that
induces autophagy. Cancer Cell 14, 90–102.

Molecular Cell

Review
van de Sluis, B., Groot, A.J., Vermeulen, J., van der Wall, E., van Diest, P.J.,
Wijmenga, C., Klomp, L.W., and Vooijs, M. (2009). COMMD1 promotes
pVHL and O2-independent proteolysis of HIF-1a via HSP90/70. PLoS ONE
4, e7332. 10.1371/journal.pone.0007332.
van de Sluis, B., Mao, X., Zhai, Y., Groot, A.J., Vermeulen, J.F., van der Wall, E.,
van Diest, P.J., Hofker, M.H., Wijmenga, C., Klomp, L.W., et al. (2010).
COMMD1 disrupts HIF-1a/b dimerization and inhibits human tumor cell invasion. J. Clin. Invest. 120, 2119–2130.
Vincent, K.A., Shyu, K., Luo, Y., Magner, M., Tio, R.A., Jiang, C., Goldberg,
M.A., Akita, G.Y., Gregory, R.J., and Isner, J.M. (2000). Angiogenesis is
induced in a rabbit model of hindlimb ischemia by naked dna encoding an
HIF-1{alpha}/VP16 hybrid transcription factor. Circulation 102, 2255–2261.
Walmsley, S.R., Cowburn, A.S., Clatworthy, M.R., Morrell, N.W., Roper, E.C.,
Singleton, V., Maxwell, P., Whyte, M.K.B., and Chilvers, E.R. (2006). Neutrophils from patients with heterozygous germline mutations in the von Hippel
Lindau protein (pVHL) display delayed apoptosis and enhanced bacterial
phagocytosis. Blood 108, 3176–3178.
Ward, P.S., Patel, J., Wise, D.R., Abdel-Wahab, O., Bennett, B.D., Coller, H.A.,
Cross, J.R., Fantin, V.R., Hedvat, C.V., Perl, A.E., et al. (2010). The common
feature of leukemia-associated IDH1 and IDH2 mutations is a neomorphic
enzyme activity converting [alpha]-ketoglutarate to 2-hydroxyglutarate.
Cancer Cell 17, 225–234.
Waypa, G.B., Marks, J.D., Guzy, R., Mungai, P.T., Schriewer, J., Dokic, D., and
Schumacker, P.T. (2010). Hypoxia triggers subcellular compartmental redox
signaling in vascular smooth muscle cells. Circ. Res. 106, 526–535.
Webb, J., Coleman, M., and Pugh, C. (2009a). Hypoxia, hypoxia-inducible
factors (HIF), HIF hydroxylases and oxygen sensing. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 66,
3539–3554.
Webb, J.D., Mura´nyi, A., Pugh, C.W., Ratcliffe, P.J., and Coleman, M.L.
(2009b). MYPT1, the targeting subunit of smooth-muscle myosin phosphatase, is a substrate for the asparaginyl hydroxylase factor inhibiting hypoxiainducible factor (FIH). Biochem. J. 420, 327–333.
Weidemann, A., Kerdiles, Y.M., Knaup, K.X., Rafie, C.A., Boutin, A.T., Stockmann, C., Takeda, N., Scadeng, M., Shih, A.Y., Haase, V.H., et al. (2009).
The glial cell response is an essential component of hypoxia-induced erythropoiesis in mice. J. Clin. Invest. 119, 3373–3383.
Werno, C., Menrad, H., Weigert, A., Dehne, N., Goerdt, S., Schledzewski, K.,
Kzhyshkowska, J., and Brune, B. (2010). Knockout of Hif-1alpha in tumorassociated macrophages enhances M2 polarization and attenuates their
pro-angiogenic responses. Carcinogenesis. Published online April 28, 2010.
10.1093/carcin/bgq088.
Whitmer, J.T., Idell-Wenger, J.A., Rovetto, M.J., and Neely, J.R. (1978).
Control of fatty acid metabolism in ischemic and hypoxic hearts. J. Biol.
Chem. 253, 4305–4309.
Wouters, B.G., and Koritzinsky, M. (2008). Hypoxia signalling through mTOR
and the unfolded protein response in cancer. Nat. Rev. Cancer 8, 851–864.
Xia, X., Lemieux, M.E., Li, W., Carroll, J.S., Brown, M., Liu, X.S., and Kung, A.L.
(2009). Integrative analysis of HIF binding and transactivation reveals its role in
maintaining histone methylation homeostasis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106,
4260–4265.
Yamakawa, M., Liu, L.X., Date, T., Belanger, A.J., Vincent, K.A., Akita, G.Y.,
Kuriyama, T., Cheng, S.H., Gregory, R.J., and Jiang, C. (2003). Hypoxia-induc-

ible factor-1 mediates activation of cultured vascular endothelial cells by
inducing multiple angiogenic factors. Circ. Res. 93, 664–673.
Yamakuchi, M., Lotterman, C.D., Bao, C., Hruban, R.H., Karim, B., Mendell,
J.T., Huso, D., and Lowenstein, C.J. (2010). P53-induced microRNA-107
inhibits HIF-1 and tumor angiogenesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107,
6334–6339.
Yang, M., Wu, M., Chiou, S., Chen, P., Chang, S., Liu, C., Teng, S., and Wu, K.
(2008). Direct regulation of TWIST by HIF-1[alpha] promotes metastasis. Nat.
Cell Biol. 10, 295–305.
Yi, X., Liang, Y., Huerta-Sanchez, E., Jin, X., Cuo, Z.X.P., Pool, J.E., Xu, X.,
Jiang, H., Vinckenbosch, N., Korneliussen, T.S., et al. (2010). Sequencing of
50 human exomes reveals adaptation to high altitude. Science 329, 75–78.
Yoshida, Y., Takahashi, K., Okita, K., Ichisaka, T., and Yamanaka, S. (2009).
Hypoxia enhances the generation of induced pluripotent stem cells. Cell
Stem Cell 5, 237–241.
Yoshida, T., Zhang, H., Iwase, T., Shen, J., Semenza, G.L., and Campochiaro,
P.A. (2010). Digoxin inhibits retinal ischemia-induced HIF-1{alpha} expression
and ocular neovascularization. FASEB J. 24, 1759–1767.
Yuan, G., Nanduri, J., Khan, S., Semenza, G.L., and Prabhakar, N.R. (2008).
Induction of HIF-1alpha expression by intermittent hypoxia: involvement of
NADPH oxidase, Ca(2+) signaling, prolyl hydroxylases, and mTOR. J. Cell.
Physiol. 217, 674–685.
Yun, Z., Maecker, H.L., Johnson, R.S., and Giaccia, A.J. (2002). Inhibition of
PPARgamma2 gene expression by the HIF-1-regulated gene DEC1/Stra13:
a mechanism for regulation of adipogenesis by hypoxia. Dev. Cell 2, 331–341.
Zhang, H., Qian, D.Z., Tan, Y.S., Lee, K., Gao, P., Ren, Y.R., Rey, S., Hammers,
H., Chang, D., Pili, R., et al. (2008). Digoxin and other cardiac glycosides inhibit
HIF-1 synthesis and block tumor growth. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105,
19579–19586.
Zhang, Q., Gu, J., Li, L., Liu, J., Luo, B., Cheung, H., Boehm, J.S., Ni, M.,
Geisen, C., and Root, D.E. (2009). Control of cyclin D1 and breast tumorigenesis by the EglN2 prolyl hydroxylase. Cancer Cell 16, 413–424.
Zhang, N., Fu, Z., Linke, S., Chicher, J., Gorman, J.J., Visk, D., Haddad, G.G.,
Poellinger, L., Peet, D.J., and Powell, F. (2010). The asparaginyl hydroxylase
factor inhibiting HIF-1a is an essential regulator of metabolism. Cell Metab.
11, 364–378.
Zhao, S., Lin, Y., Xu, W., Jiang, W., Zha, Z., Wang, P., Yu, W., Li, Z., Gong, L.,
Peng, Y., et al. (2009). Glioma-derived mutations in IDH1 dominantly inhibit
IDH1 catalytic activity and induce HIF-1. Science 324, 261–265.
Zhao, F., Mancuso, A., Bui, T.V., Tong, X., Gruber, J.J., Swider, C.R., Sanchez,
P.V., Lum, J.J., Sayed, N., Melo, J.V., et al. (2010). Imatinib resistance associated with BCR-ABL upregulation is dependent on HIF-1a-induced metabolic
reprograming. Oncogene 29, 2962–2972.
Zhong, L., D’Urso, A., Toiber, D., Sebastian, C., Henry, R.E., Vadysirisack,
D.D., Guimaraes, A., Marinelli, B., Wikstrom, J.D., Nir, T., et al. (2010). The
histone deacetylase Sirt6 regulates glucose homeostasis via Hif1. Cell 140,
280–293.
Zimmer, M., Ebert, B., Neil, C., Brenner, K., Papaioannou, I., Melas, A.,
Tolliday, N., Lamb, J., Pantopoulos, K., and Golub, T. (2008). Small-molecule
inhibitors of HIF-2a translation link its 50 UTR iron-responsive element to
oxygen sensing. Mol. Cell 32, 838–848.

Molecular Cell 40, October 22, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc. 309

