Molecular Cell

Review
Regulation by Small RNAs in Bacteria:
Expanding Frontiers
Gisela Storz,1,* Jo¨rg Vogel,2 and Karen M. Wassarman3
1Cell Biology and Metabolism Program, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, 18 Library Drive,
Bethesda, MD 20892-5430, USA
2Institute for Molecular Infection Biology, University of Wu
¨ rzburg, Josef-Schneider-Strasse 2, D-97080 Wu¨rzburg, Germany
3Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1550 Linden Drive, Madison, WI 53706, USA
*Correspondence: storz@helix.nih.gov
DOI 10.1016/j.molcel.2011.08.022

Research on the discovery and characterization of small, regulatory RNAs in bacteria has exploded in recent
years. These sRNAs act by base pairing with target mRNAs with which they share limited or extended
complementarity, or by modulating protein activity, in some cases by mimicking other nucleic acids. Mechanistic insights into how sRNAs bind mRNAs and proteins, how they compete with each other, and how they
interface with ribonucleases are active areas of discovery. Current work also has begun to illuminate how
sRNAs modulate expression of distinct regulons and key transcription factors, thus integrating sRNA activity
into extensive regulatory networks. In addition, the application of RNA deep sequencing has led to reports of
hundreds of additional sRNA candidates in a wide swath of bacterial species. Most importantly, recent
studies have served to clarify the abundance of remaining questions about how, when, and why sRNA-mediated regulation is of such importance to bacterial lifestyles.
Introduction
It is firmly established that RNA transcripts are important regulators whose roles cannot be ignored in any organism. In bacteria,
a large number of these RNA regulators exist as relatively short
transcripts (50 –300 nucleotides) that act on independently expressed targets. These regulators, which are most commonly
referred to as small RNAs (sRNAs), are the focus of this review.
Regulatory RNA elements that are transcribed as part of their
target messenger RNAs (mRNAs) are discussed elsewhere
(Breaker, 2011).
The most extensively studied sRNAs, often called trans-encoded sRNAs, are those that regulate mRNAs by short, imperfect base-pairing interactions (reviewed in Waters and Storz,
2009). Many of these sRNAs base pair at or near the ribosome
binding site (RBS) of their targets and block translation by
occluding ribosomes. However, other family members base
pair at more distant locations and thus interfere with ribosome
binding by other mechanisms, increase ribosome binding by
preventing the formation of inhibitory secondary structures, or
decrease or increase mRNA stability. In Gram-negative bacteria,
the RNA binding protein Hfq is usually required for the function
and/or stability of this family of sRNAs.
Increasing numbers of sRNAs that are encoded on the opposite strand of established coding sequences, here denoted antisense RNAs (asRNAs), also have been found to impact translation and/or mRNA stability of the fully complementary sense
gene (reviewed in Georg and Hess, 2011; Thomason and Storz,
2010). However, for some asRNAs, regulation may be exerted by
the act of transcribing the asRNA, rather than be a function of the
resulting RNA.
Other prominent sRNA regulators act by modifying protein
activity, as exemplified by the very highly conserved E. coli
CsrB and 6S RNAs. These sRNAs bind specific proteins rather
880 Molecular Cell 43, September 16, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc.

than base pair to target RNAs (reviewed in Babitzke and Romeo,
2007; Wassarman, 2007; Willkomm and Hartmann, 2005).
The outstanding progress in identifying and characterizing
bacterial sRNAs has made it abundantly clear that RNA regulators are ubiquitous, are often well conserved, and may even
exceed protein regulators in number and diversity. Here, we
emphasize new concepts revealed in the last 2 to 3 years by
citing a limited number of examples, but the general ideas hold
true for most sRNAs. Many exciting questions still remain,
even in well-studied Escherichia coli and Salmonella, and
certainly in other more divergent bacteria.
Intricate Mechanisms of sRNA Base Pairing
How base-pairing sRNAs find their target mRNAs among thousands of other cellular transcripts is key for understanding how
these sRNAs function, and extensive research has focused on
characterizing the RNA elements and protein chaperones
required.
RNA Elements Involved in Base Pairing
Early studies of asRNAs encoded on plasmids, phages, and
transposons led to a prevalent view that structural elements
and multi-step interactions were crucial in base-pairing mechanisms of bacterial RNAs (reviewed in Brantl, 2007; Wagner
et al., 2002). Despite potential complementarity of hundreds
of base pairs or more, these asRNAs recognize their target
mRNAs with initial fast, high-affinity contacts via a few nucleotides exposed in stem-loop regions of the regulator, the target,
or both. After this first ‘‘kissing’’ interaction, additional base
pairs can form, often involving rearrangements in RNA secondary structure. Whether or not chromosomally encoded
asRNAs act by similar mechanisms is only starting to be investigated, but a recent study of the ibsC-SibC sense-antisense
pair in E. coli does indicate that some structural elements are

Molecular Cell

Review

Figure 1. General Properties of Trans-Encoded Base-Pairing sRNAs
(A) Diagram showing the modular structure of Hfq-binding sRNAs. The most
highly conserved regions in seven enteric sRNAs are shaded gray. This
conservation generally corresponds to the region(s) of the sRNA involved in
base pairing, frequently occurring at the 50 end, but corresponding to two and
three regions of base pairing for FnrS and Spot42, respectively.
(B) Diagram showing the different positions at which sRNAs can block ribosome binding.
(C) Diagram showing ways by which base paired sRNAs can direct RNase
E-mediated target mRNA processing.

required and that base pairing proceeds via multiple steps (Han
et al., 2010).
Structure-driven pairing with target mRNAs also has been
demonstrated for a subset of sRNAs with trans-encoded targets.
Base-pairing sRNAs in Staphylococcus aureus (RNAIII, RsaE,
and SprD) usually recognize target RNAs using C-rich stretches
that are within accessible loop regions (Bohn et al., 2010;
Chabelskaya et al., 2010; Geissmann et al., 2009). Several other
sRNAs in this organism carry conserved C-rich motifs, suggest-

ing that they may act similarly. A conserved C-rich apical loop in
the enterobacterial CyaR sRNA also is utilized to recognize
a single-stranded region in several regulated mRNAs (De Lay
and Gottesman, 2009; Johansen et al., 2008; Papenfort et al.,
2008).
For many other trans-encoded base-pairing sRNAs, however,
the region required for pairing is encompassed primarily within
single-stranded stretches, suggesting a complex structure is
not as important (Peer and Margalit, 2011). In fact, these sRNAs
appear to be modular in enteric bacteria (Figure 1A). A structured
30 end followed by poly(U) promotes Rho-independent transcription termination and protects the sRNA against 30 exonucleases.
A second domain is the binding site for Hfq, the chaperone
protein required for function and stabilization of many of these
sRNAs. A third region is utilized for base pairing to target
RNAs. This region often is highly conserved and appears to
interact with target mRNAs by a ‘‘seed-pairing’’ mechanism
similar in concept to target selection by eukaryotic microRNAs
(miRNAs) (reviewed in Bartel, 2009). Experiments in which the
seed regions of Salmonella RybB or MicC were fused to
unrelated scaffold RNAs demonstrated that the seed is sufficient
to guide target recognition (Papenfort et al., 2010; Pfeiffer
et al., 2009).
More in depth knowledge is required to fully understand how
these sRNAs regulate their targets. The optimal length and
nucleotide composition of the bacterial seed have not been fully
defined. Seed lengths of 6 or 7 nucleotides have been proposed
for the SgrS and RybB sRNAs (Balbontı´n et al., 2010; Kawamoto
et al., 2006; Papenfort et al., 2010), but this may vary among
sRNA-mRNA pairs. Most studies examining seed requirements
used overexpressed sRNAs, raising the possibility that sRNAs
at endogenous levels could have somewhat different preferences. Curiously, the seed region of many sRNAs is located at
their very 50 ends (Guillier and Gottesman, 2008; Papenfort
et al., 2010), suggesting that position may impact function.
Less information is available regarding what features of target
mRNAs influence base pairing and regulation. While initial
studies suggested that pairing occurred primarily in a region
overlapping or adjacent to the RBS, more recent studies have
shown that sRNA base pairing as far as 70 nucleotides upstream
or 15 nucleotides downstream of the start codon can block
translation in E. coli and Salmonella (Bouvier et al., 2008;
Holmqvist et al., 2010) (Figure 1B). The sites of base pairing for
sRNAs that activate translation by preventing the formation of
an inhibitory secondary structure via an anti-antisense mechanism can be more distant (reviewed in Fro¨hlich and Vogel,
2009). sRNAs that primarily regulate mRNA stability can do so
at even more variable locations, including deep within the coding
sequence of the target mRNA (Pfeiffer et al., 2009).
The impact of RNA structures, noncanonical base pairs and
sequences outside the seed also remain to be further evaluated.
A recent survey identified a propensity for a 30 adenosine adjacent to the region of pairing, which is somewhat reminiscent of
miRNA target sites (Papenfort et al., 2010). Systematic analyses,
such as recently carried out for E. coli RyhB (Hao et al., 2011), will
be necessary to better define parameters that allow highly
specific selection of bona fide mRNA targets from the thousands
of other nontarget transcripts. This information will help elucidate
Molecular Cell 43, September 16, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc. 881

Molecular Cell

Review
the advantages of more extensive, structure-driven pairing
versus limited seed-driven pairing, as well as facilitate the prediction of target mRNAs and the design of synthetic regulators.
Roles of RNA Chaperones
The functions of trans-encoded base-pairing RNAs are generally
dependent on the highly studied RNA chaperone Hfq in Gramnegative bacteria (reviewed in Vogel and Luisi, 2011). In vitro
experiments suggest that Hfq generally binds an A/U-rich
single-stranded region often located adjacent to a stem-loop
structure, reminiscent of binding sites for the related Sm and
Lsm proteins in eukaryotes. However, predictions of Hfq binding
sites in sRNAs are unreliable, given the weak conservation and
the presence of multiple A/U-rich sites. In addition, accumulating
evidence indicates that polyU at the 30 end of sRNAs also can be
recognized by Hfq, possibly serving as a loading site (Otaka
et al., 2011; Sauer and Weichenrieder, 2011).
Hfq binding sites on mRNAs are even less well documented,
and there are very few mRNA sites with proven physiological
relevance. The mRNA binding sites have been mainly predicted
based on crystallographic studies of Hfq (Link et al., 2009) and
genomic SELEX approaches (Lorenz et al., 2010). In light of the
nonspecific binding activity of Hfq in vitro, it will be necessary
to globally map Hfq contacts with cellular RNAs in vivo with
approaches such as the covalent crosslinking techniques that
have given unprecedented insights into binding determinants
for eukaryotic RNA-binding proteins (reviewed in Licatalosi and
Darnell, 2010).
Despite the widely accepted role of Hfq as an ‘‘RNA chaperone,’’ the detailed mechanism(s) by which it promotes productive encounters of cognate RNA partners in cells remains ambiguous. High-resolution structures of Hfq with RNA oligomers,
together with in vitro binding assays with Hfq mutants, have revealed several RNA binding sites on both the proximal and distal
faces of the hexameric Hfq ring (Link et al., 2009; Sauer and Weichenrieder, 2011), consistent with Hfq binding to more than one
RNA simultaneously. There is evidence suggesting Hfq facilitates base pairing by increasing annealing rates (Fender et al.,
2010; Hopkins et al., 2011; Hwang et al., 2011) by stabilizing
cognate sRNA-mRNA duplexes (Soper et al., 2010) or by
promoting structural remodeling of one of the RNA partners
(Maki et al., 2010). What is not as clear is whether particular
mechanisms are specific to sRNA-mRNA pairs. It is also not
known which RNA binds first, how Hfq affects the first and
subsequent RNA(s) and whether Hfq helps to position the
sRNA seed region to interrogate potential mRNA partners. In
addition, there is the question whether Hfq directly affects ribosome binding or the action of nucleases subsequent to base
pairing. Structures of Hfq bound to ‘‘natural’’ RNA targets,
mutants that separate the different activities of Hfq, and in vitro
assays that recapitulate regulation in the presence of multiple
specific and nonspecific RNAs as well as other accessory
proteins are much needed to fully understand the mechanism
of Hfq action.
While the focus has long been on E. coli Hfq, a role in sRNAmediated regulation extends to distant bacteria such as the
Gram-negative Spirochaetales Borrelia burgdorferi (Lybecker
et al., 2010) and the Gram-positive firmicute Listeria monocytogenes (Nielsen et al., 2010), both of which have significantly
882 Molecular Cell 43, September 16, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc.

divergent Hfq proteins. Intriguingly, a growing number of bacteria
such as Burkholderia cenocepacia (Ramos et al., 2011) are now
known to contain multiple Hfq proteins indicating potential functional diversification. Studies of Hfq in a range of organisms will
help uncover its full role in posttranscriptional regulation.
Obviously, other bacterial proteins also may contribute to
base-pairing sRNA function. Such proteins could act as RNA
chaperones in addition to Hfq or in lieu of Hfq in species where
there is no obvious Hfq homolog. A chaperone role has been
suggested for the E. coli ProQ protein, which has a C-terminal
domain with predicted structural similarities to Hfq (Chaulk
et al., 2011). The YbeY protein, which is ubiquitous in bacteria
and shares structural similarities with a domain of eukaryotic
Argonaute proteins, impacts gene expression analogous to
Hfq in Sinorhizobium meliloti (Pandey et al., 2011). Further characterization of the contributions of these proteins, other putative
chaperones, and other RNA-binding proteins such as helicases
and ribosomal proteins to sRNA-mediated regulation certainly
are important directions of study.
Contributions of Dynamic Interactions and Competition
Other critical parameters need to be established before full
understanding of base-pairing mechanisms is realized. Cellular
copy numbers are unknown for most sRNAs and target mRNAs,
and even the level of Hfq remains controversial in E. coli (400
versus 10,000 copies) and has not been determined in other
organisms (reviewed in Vogel and Luisi, 2011). Binding constants
have only been measured for individual RNAs in vitro (Fender
et al., 2010; Olejniczak, 2011; Soper et al., 2010; Updegrove
et al., 2008). Understanding the intracellular concentrations of
sRNAs, mRNAs, and interacting proteins, as well as the binding
constants and kinetic parameters for their interactions, is important for a number of considerations. First, since regulatory
effects are observed within minutes, sRNAs and mRNAs
presumably must cycle on and off Hfq rapidly to allow sufficient
encounters of cognate RNA molecules in an appropriate time
frame. The cycling is proposed to involve sequential binding
and release of RNAs on individual subunits around the hexameric ring of Hfq (Fender et al., 2010). Second, recent studies
suggest cellular RNAs compete for Hfq and that one abundant
sRNA can indirectly impact the targets of others by disrupting
Hfq-mediated effects (Hussein and Lim, 2011; Papenfort et al.,
2009). Concentrations and rates of association and dissociation
are likely to be particularly critical for systems with multiple
homologous or even heterologous sRNAs acting redundantly
or additively. Finally, these parameters will aid in the modeling
of sRNA networks in bacteria, an area receiving increased attention (reviewed in Levine and Hwa, 2008).
The availability of sRNAs and their target mRNAs additionally
must be considered. For instance, the seed and target regions
might be sequestered in RNA secondary structures or by ribosomes and other proteins at various times during growth. An
intriguing possibility is that subcellular localization may serve to
regulate sRNA action. The ptsG mRNA is repressed efficiently
by SgrS RNA only when the mRNA encodes transmembrane
domains that mediate association with membranes via the translocation machinery (Kawamoto et al., 2005). It is proposed that
ribosome access to the ptsG mRNA is reduced once the transcript is membrane associated, which leads to increased SgrS

Molecular Cell

Review
access. Whether there are specific proteins to sequester sRNAs
or compete with their binding to mRNAs, analogous to proteins
that prevent miRNAs from acting (reviewed in Meisner and Filipowicz, 2011; Suzuki and Miyazono, 2011) remains to be seen.
Intimate Connections between sRNAs and RNases
Modulation of bacterial RNA stability is a well-established mechanism to control gene expression, but it has only recently
received attention in conjunction with sRNA-mediated regulation. Changes in mRNA stability brought about by base-pairing
sRNAs initially were attributed to the connection between ribosome loading and mRNA stability. However, sRNAs modulate
mRNA levels faster than can be explained by altered ribosome
binding (Papenfort et al., 2006), and recent studies show direct
sRNA regulation of mRNA stability by RNase E or RNase III,
even for sRNAs that affect translation (reviewed in Caron et al.,
2010). Salmonella MicC and RybB exclusively increase degradation of some targets through base pairing within the coding
region of mRNAs (Papenfort et al., 2010; Pfeiffer et al., 2009),
and E. coli RyhB destabilizes one of its targets via interactions
with an intergenic region (Desnoyers et al., 2009). sRNAs also
affect mRNA stability to increase expression. In Clostridium
perfringens, an inhibitory 50 terminal stem loop normally blocks
expression of a collagenase mRNA. Binding of the VR-RNA
induces an endonucleolytic cleavage that generates an mRNA
with an accessible RBS and a different 50 structure predicted
to increase stability (Obana et al., 2010). Protection of the 50
end of mRNAs from nucleases also is exploited by group A
Streptococcus, where FasX RNA binding to the 50 end of the
streptokinase mRNA provides a barrier to nucleases, thereby
promoting mRNA stability (Ramirez-Pen˜a et al., 2010).
RNases also contribute to sRNA activities and levels in various
other ways. Most base-pairing sRNAs are transcribed as independent transcripts, but many are processed in some manner.
For E. coli ArcZ, nuclease digestion serves to reveal the
conserved seed region at the 50 end (Papenfort et al., 2009),
while processing of the Vibro cholerae MicX leads to increased
stability (Davis and Waldor, 2007). Generation of the mature
E. coli 6S RNA involves a multi-step pathway of 50 endonucleolytic digestion by RNase E or G and exonucleolytic trimming at
both the 50 and 30 ends (Chae et al., 2011).
The stabilities of base-pairing sRNAs can be influenced by the
presence of target mRNAs. E. coli RyhB and other sRNAs
undergo coupled degradation with mRNA targets by RNase E
(Masse´ et al., 2003). Interestingly, this mode of degradation
can be discriminatory. The ChiX sRNA found in enteric bacteria
is a target for RNase E cleavage when base paired with an
mRNA decoy, but not when base paired to the mRNA it
represses (Figueroa-Bossi et al., 2009; Overgaard et al., 2009),
indicating that there must be specificity in RNase recognition
or activity. Furthermore, E. coli MicA appears to be degraded
by RNase E when not base-paired and by RNase III when paired
with target mRNAs (Viegas et al., 2011).
A key for understanding the role of nucleases in sRNA-mediated regulation will be deciphering their specificity for sRNAs
and mRNAs, alone or paired to each other. Cleavage of sRNAmRNA duplexes by RNase III, such as directed by S. aureus
RNAIII, reflects the known propensity of this nuclease to cleave

uninterrupted RNA duplex and can be recapitulated with the
purified enzyme in vitro (Huntzinger et al., 2005). In contrast,
specific signals directing RNase E cleavage remain ambiguous,
although it is known that RNase E preferentially cleaves within
single-stranded regions (Caron et al., 2010). The site of cleavage
can be adjacent to the sRNA-target mRNA duplex, as proposed
for MicC-directed cleavage of the ompD mRNA (Pfeiffer et al.,
2009), or a significant distance from the region of duplex formation as found for RyhB and sodB (Pre´vost et al., 2011) (Figure 1C;
local or distal cleavage model, respectively). However, even for
the well studied RyhB-sodB pair, molecular determinants for
cleavage by RNase E remain controversial (Afonyushkin et al.,
2005; Pre´vost et al., 2011).
Other protein interactions may influence RNase cleavage of
sRNAs and/or mRNAs. The RNase E-mediated inactivation of
GlmZ, which removes the region required for base pairing to
the target mRNA, requires the adaptor protein YhbJ (Reichenbach et al., 2008; Urban and Vogel, 2008). YhbJ is further regulated by a second sRNA (GlmY), highlighting the potential for
complex regulation of sRNA activity. Studies of other proteins
that modulate sRNA stability, such as polynucleotide phosphorylase, which was identified as impacting sRNA turnover in a
genetic screen (De Lay and Gottesman, 2011), are still needed.
A molecular understanding of how RNases and other proteins
interact and influence sRNA function and stability is only rudimentary. Hfq was reported to bind to the large C terminus of
RNase E (Ikeda et al., 2011) suggesting that RNase E may be recruited to sRNA pairs via Hfq. There also have been indications
that sRNAs can direct target cleavage by RNases other than
RNase III and E (Opdyke et al., 2011). Further elucidation of the
interactions between sRNAs and RNases await studies focused
on uncovering the key players, identifying the determinants of
specificity, and establishing in vitro assays.
Modulating Protein Activity with sRNAs
Most sRNAs work in conjunction with proteins in vivo, and sRNAprotein interactions can be grouped into two general categories.
In the first category, as exemplified by the base-pairing sRNAs
discussed above, the sRNA provides the specificity and the
primary activity to the RNA-protein partnership. The second category, which is the focus of this section, is comprised of sRNAs that
interact with proteins for the purpose of regulating their activity.
Some of these sRNAs act by sequestering proteins, particularly
RNA binding proteins, from normal targets. However, sRNA
binding to proteins also can produce more complex outcomes,
such as the modification of an enzymatic activity (Figure 2).
Regulating RNA Binding Proteins
sRNAs that regulate RNA binding proteins typically work by
mimicry, whereby the sRNA contains the protein recognition
sequence, often in multiple copies. The classic example is the
E. coli CsrB RNA, which has 18 binding sites for CsrA, an RNA
binding protein known to regulate mRNA translation and stability
(reviewed in Babitzke and Romeo, 2007). CsrB RNA thus acts as
a direct competitor for CsrA target mRNAs. Much is known about
CsrA and how its dimer recognizes a GGA motif in the loop of
short stem structures in CsrB and mRNA targets. However, as
diverse CsrA- and CsrB-like molecules continue to be identified,
more flexibility in target site recognition may be revealed. The
Molecular Cell 43, September 16, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc. 883

Molecular Cell

Review

Figure 2. General Properties of sRNAs that Modulate Protein
Activity
Bacterial sRNA binding to proteins has been demonstrated to inhibit and/or
modify protein activities. It is proposed that sRNA binding to proteins also can
activate or to bring two or more proteins into together. The association of sRNA
and proteins is likely to be influenced by many different factors, and the
disassociation can be actively or passively controlled.

recent discovery of the CrcZ RNA, which has five repeats of
a CA-rich motif bound by the translation repressor protein Crc
in Pseudomonas (Moreno et al., 2009; Sonnleitner et al., 2009),
raises the possibility that other classes of protein-sequestering
sRNAs remain to be found.
CsrB-like sRNAs are widely distributed among bacterial
species, and it is common to find multiple CsrB-like RNAs per
organism, and in some cases multiple CsrA-like proteins (reviewed in Sonnleitner and Haas, 2011). The possibilities for
complex regulation utilizing different RNA-protein partners thus
are numerous, dispelling the idea that these sRNAs function to
‘‘simply’’ sequester a protein. For example, Pseudomonas
fluorescens has three CsrB-like RNAs (RsmX/Y/Z) and two
CsrA-like proteins (RsmA/E), leading to at least six possible
combinations of sRNA-protein interactions.
An important open question regarding protein binding sRNAs
is when and how the targeted proteins are released from sRNA
sequestration. One such factor impacting release in E. coli is
CsrD, an RNase E adaptor protein that modulates CsrB RNA
stability (Suzuki et al., 2006).
Regulating Enzymes
Other sRNAs bind proteins with enzymatic activity, and have the
potential to inhibit, activate or modify protein activity. The beststudied example is the E. coli 6S RNA, which binds to the housekeeping form of RNA polymerase (s70-RNAP) (reviewed in Wassarman, 2007; Willkomm and Hartmann, 2005). The secondary
structure of 6S RNA largely mimics the conformation of DNA
during transcription initiation, which suggests this RNA also
could act as a direct competitor. However, the binding sites of
DNA and RNA on RNAP are not fully congruent (Klocko and Wassarman, 2009), and the effects on transcription are surprisingly
complex (Cavanagh et al., 2008; Neusser et al., 2010). Direct
downregulation is observed for only a subset of s70-dependent
promoters, indicating that s70-RNAP activity is modified rather
than simply inhibited.
884 Molecular Cell 43, September 16, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc.

As with all sRNAs, expanding studies into diverse species
have given interesting new perspectives on potential complexities for regulation by 6S RNA. For instance, several species
including B. subtilis and Legionella pneumophila express two
6S RNAs. Initial work has demonstrated that the two RNAs are
functionally distinct based on different phenotypes and/or
changes in gene expression in cells lacking one or the other
sRNA (K.M.W., unpublished data) (Weissenmayer et al., 2011;
Faucher et al., 2010). In addition, it is possible that 6S RNAs in
other species act quite differently than in E. coli, as the regulon
for one of the L. pneumophila 6S RNAs contains a limited number
of genes, in contrast to the extensive 6S RNA regulon observed
for E. coli (Cavanagh et al., 2008; Faucher et al., 2010; Neusser
et al., 2010).
Further understanding of how sRNAs modulate enzymes and
how this regulation impacts cell physiology again will require
detailed analyses of the dynamics of association and disassociation in vivo and identification of other cellular components that
influence these processes. A key finding was that E. coli 6S RNA
serves as a template for RNA synthesis by RNAP to generate
short product RNAs (pRNA), and that this process leads to
release of 6S RNA from RNAP during outgrowth from stationary
phase (reviewed in Wassarman, 2007). These types of studies
provide new insights into the enzymes regulated, such as the
finding that the cellular RNA polymerase can function as an
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase.
For sRNAs that regulate protein activity, a number of important
mechanistic questions remain unanswered. Thus, structure
determination of this class of RNAs, with and without binding
partners, may be especially enlightening. It is also not clear
how many of these sRNAs exist. Traditionally, sRNAs that bind
to Hfq were classified as most likely to act by base pairing. In
light of the increasing numbers of asRNAs that do not require
Hfq for function, however, it is more difficult to assess how
well the lack of Hfq binding predicts sRNAs that modulate
protein activity (reviewed in Thomason and Storz, 2010). It
seems probable that additional sRNAs function by non-basepairing mechanisms, and it is prudent to continue to search for
them among growing numbers of identified sRNAs. As a consequence, the diversity in sRNAs functions is expected to increase.
For example, sRNAs could modulate proteins and enzymes via
allosteric regulation or could tether proteins to each other,
a mechanism likely to be used by a small RNA encoded by the
ColE1 plasmid (Chant and Summers, 2007) (Figure 2).
Vast and Diverse sRNA Regulons
In most of the initial studies of chromosomally encoded sRNAs,
only one, or at most a few, target mRNAs were uncovered (reviewed in Wassarman et al., 1999). It is now evident that many
sRNAs regulate a multitude of genes and have roles as broad
as some general transcription factors in bacteria and some
miRNAs in eukaryotes (Figure 3).
Defining sRNA Regulons
For base-pairing sRNAs, targets are recognized through
complementary sequences within each mRNA, while for protein
binding sRNAs, targets are recognized via their interactions with
the sRNA-regulated proteins. Experimental and computational
approaches have been used to define the currently known

Molecular Cell

Review
Figure 3. Networks Regulated by TransEncoded Base-Pairing sRNAs in E. coli
The network is based on a compilation of published interactions. Boxes represent sRNAs and
ovals represent mRNA targets. Ovals corresponding to mRNAs encoding transcription regulators are colored blue. Red lines indicate negative
regulation, green lines indicate positive regulation,
and gray lines indicate base pairing but no effect
on the target. The thickness of the lines indicates
the level of proof for base pairing; compensatory
mutation analysis supports those interactions
represented with the thickest lines. A limited
number of lines emanating from an sRNA may
reflect incomplete characterization or the fact that
the sRNA has only few targets.

regulons (reviewed in Sharma and Vogel, 2009). The experimental approaches have included studies of sRNA-dependent
changes in gene expression (by expression microarrays, deep
sequencing, or comparative protein analyses), global searches
for mRNAs that bind to a particular sRNA-regulated protein,
and genetic screens for changes in reporter gene expression
or altered growth phenotypes. Computational approaches
have been based on the potential of mRNAs to base pair with
sRNAs of interest or to carry binding sites for a protein whose
activity is modified by the sRNA. Both direct and indirect effects
will be detected by approaches that monitor altered gene
expression. These effects are likely to help uncover the physiological role of a given sRNA. However, only direct targets will

contribute to mechanistic understanding
of how each sRNA functions.
Once identified, sRNA regulons often
elucidate a clear physiological role for
a particular sRNA within well-established
regulatory networks (Figure 3). In
Caulobacter crescentus, overexpression
of the carbon starvation-induced CrfA
RNA led to induction of TonB-dependent
receptors, consistent with a CrfA role in
facilitating nutrient uptake (Landt et al.,
2010). In addition to enhancing our understanding of a particular sRNA role, the
characterization of some regulons has
given new insights into some physiological responses. For instance, studies of
the Fur-regulated RyhB, whose levels
are highest when iron is limiting, showed
that RyhB contributes to metabolic remodeling under low-iron conditions by
repressing expression of a serine acetyltransferase, which increases the flux of
serine into siderophore production (Salvail et al., 2010). Nonetheless, the physiological roles of a subset of sRNAs have
been more difficult to decipher, in part
because the currently identified regulons
are particularly small or large, or do not
fit into known responses.
Some discussion of how true direct targets can be identified is
warranted. In studies using transient overexpression of sRNAs, it
is often assumed that direct targets are affected before indirect
targets (Masse´ et al., 2005; Sharma et al., 2011). However, if
targets are regulated through different mechanisms, such as
translation versus mRNA decay, or with different efficiencies,
this assumption may not be valid. For base-pairing sRNAs,
compensatory mutant analysis continues to be the gold standard for validation of direct targets, but such studies must be
done on a gene-by-gene basis. In addition, mutagenesis may
not always give conclusive results (Desnoyers et al., 2009),
such as in cases where base-pairing regions of the sRNA or
target mRNA have multiple functions. It is less clear how to
Molecular Cell 43, September 16, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc. 885

Molecular Cell

Review
differentiate direct from indirect regulation of non-base-pairing
sRNAs, especially when in vitro systems do not fully recapitulate
in vivo observations such as for 6S RNA (reviewed in Wassarman, 2007).
Other considerations include the relative importance of
multiple targets, whether the most strongly regulated targets
are most biologically significant, and what targets are being
missed with current approaches. Looking at changes in mRNA
levels is the most common approach for characterizing sRNA
regulons, but low abundance targets may be overlooked. In
addition, some mechanisms of regulation do not result in altered
mRNA levels, and changes in mRNA levels may not always be reflected as altered protein activity. Another consideration is that
methods examining changes in gene expression or altered
phenotypes typically utilize high overexpression of the sRNA of
interest. sRNAs do not function in isolation, and therefore these
high levels of expression, often at times or conditions when the
endogenous sRNA is not normally expressed, may have unintended consequences that complicate interpretation of the
results. In addition, mRNA species whose levels change upon
sRNA overexpression might actually be decoys that regulate
the sRNA under native conditions rather than being altered
themselves, as has been argued in the case of eukaryotic
miRNAs (reviewed in Seitz, 2009).
Computational predictions for mRNA targets of sRNA regulation have improved with additional information regarding what
is required for sRNA-mRNA interactions (reviewed in Backofen
and Hess, 2010). However, bioinformatic approaches alone are
still fraught with high false positive rates because not all parameters are known. Conversely, since the searches are based on
known, possibly biased information, false negative rates also
may be a problem. For example, many computational
approaches have focused on the region surrounding the start
site of translation, which have missed more distant base-pairing regions of interest. Predictions of targets of protein-modifying sRNAs also can be challenging depending on the nature
and understanding of the target features. Nevertheless, the
combination of experimental and computational approaches
for identifying sRNAs targets has contributed significantly to
our understanding of the physiological relevance of sRNAs
and hopefully will soon allow the definition of complete sRNA
regulons.
sRNA Regulons as Part of Regulatory Networks
In addition to revealing regulated genes, regulon identification
has begun to elucidate the contributions of sRNAs within the
context of larger regulatory networks (reviewed in Beisel and
Storz, 2010). For example, E. coli Spot 42 RNA is part of a multioutput feedforward loop, in which Crp both directly activates
target genes by binding to their promoters and indirectly activates the same genes by repressing the synthesis of the Spot
42 RNA, which acts as a repressor of the genes (Beisel and Storz,
2011). This configuration impacts the dynamics of target gene
expression in cells switching between the presence and
absence of glucose. Another regulatory scheme has been
defined by the action of sRNAs such as the sE-regulated MicA
and RybB, which endow an activator protein (sE) with apparent
repressive activity on particular targets (Gogol et al., 2011),
thus leading to the opposite outcome on target genes than the
886 Molecular Cell 43, September 16, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc.

transcription regulator was designed to carry out directly. Additional levels of complexity arise from crossregulation. RyhB
represses expression of its own regulator Fur (Vecerek et al.,
2007), and MicA base pairs with the mRNA encoding the PhoPQ
two-component system important in magnesium sensing and
thus links one regulatory network with another (Coornaert
et al., 2010). 6S RNA modulates expression of a number of key
regulators, including relA, crp, and the translation machinery,
amplifying the global response as nutrient quality decreases
(Cavanagh et al., 2010; Neusser et al., 2010).
A growing number of mRNAs encoding transcription regulators appear to be targets of multiple sRNAs. The classic
example, rpoS, is regulated directly by several Hfq-binding
sRNAs (DsrA, RprA, ArcZ) and indirectly by other sRNAs by
mechanisms that are not yet fully understood but may involve
competition between sRNAs (OxyS) or RNA polymerase availability (6S RNA) (reviewed in Battesti et al., 2010). Other examples of mRNAs that encode key transcription factors and are
targeted by multiple sRNAs include E. coli CsgD, which regulates
curli genes (Holmqvist et al., 2010), Lrp, which regulates many
genes involved in amino acid biosynthesis (Sharma et al.,
2011) as well as Vibro LuxR and AphA, two key regulators in
quorum sensing (Rutherford et al., 2011). In fact, the balance
between Qrr RNA repression of LuxR and activation of AphA is
critical in ensuring appropriate gene expression at both low
and high densities as well as during the transition between
them. These recent results strongly suggest that additional regulatory proteins will be found to be modulated by multiple sRNAs,
and that crosstalk between regulatory networks is even more
extensive than currently appreciated. Methods for monitoring
expression of reporter genes containing putative sRNA-targeted
sequences in response to libraries of sRNA-overexpression
plasmids allow efficient screening of sRNA effects on putative
target genes (Mandin and Gottesman, 2010; Urban and Vogel,
2007), again with the caveat of possible artifacts due to overexpression. These systems also can be used to test the effects of
mutations as well as sRNA-sRNA competition or hierarchy on
specific targets.
Advantages of sRNA Regulators
As sRNA regulon identification proceeds, it is worthwhile to
consider possible advantages of RNA-based regulation over
protein-based regulation. Previously suggested benefits include
reduced metabolic cost, additional levels of regulation, faster
regulation and unique regulatory properties (reviewed in Beisel
and Storz, 2010). The coupled degradation of many sRNAmRNA pairs permits sRNAs to achieve responses that are
different than those of transcription factors (Levine et al.,
2007). In addition, the ability to regulate a target at two levels,
with both a transcription regulator and base-pairing sRNA, has
been shown to reduce leakiness as well as alter the dynamics
of target gene expression (Beisel and Storz, 2011). With increasingly larger and hopefully less biased data sets, it should
become clear whether there are particular networks or genes
that are predominant targets for sRNA regulation and whether
sRNAs have reappearing positions in regulatory circuits. These
data also should provide insights into why particular targets
are regulated by different sRNAs and why some systems contain
multiple sRNAs with apparently similar function.

Molecular Cell

Review
The sRNA Biome
The initial systematic searches for sRNAs based on screens for
sequence conservation or orphan promoter and terminator
sequences, or characterization of size-selected RNA, led to the
identification of dozens of sRNAs (reviewed in Sharma and Vogel, 2009). The advent of deep sequencing has turned the
discovery of regulatory RNAs on its head, revealing literally
hundreds of previously undetected transcripts, as illustrated
by studies in Helicobacter pylori (Sharma et al., 2010) and
Synechocystis (Mitschke et al., 2011). The sequencing reads
map to both intergenic and genic regions, in both sense and antisense directions relative to annotated genes and correspond to
transcripts of a wide range of sizes. Multiple short transcripts
most likely derived from the 50 end, 30 end, or internal regions
of mRNAs also have been detected and may function as independent sRNAs as has been suggested for the SreA and SreB
50 fragments in L. monocytogenes (Loh et al., 2009). To date,
very few of these newly reported candidate sRNAs have been
functionally characterized, but their discovery raises important
questions about how to define sRNAs and whether all detectable
RNA transcripts have function.
Although the results of deep sequencing approaches are
a potential gold mine for finding sRNA regulators, they highlight
a number of challenges. At the simplest level, processing and
comparing these extremely large data sets are difficult. In addition, there is a surprising lack of overlap between transcripts reported, even for studies in the same organism (reviewed in
Croucher and Thomson, 2010). Use of different cDNA preparation protocols, different sequencing platforms, and different
thresholds and stringencies for annotating transcripts are likely
to contribute to this lack of clarity. Before results from deep
sequencing analyses can be used to full advantage, the following
questions will need to be addressed. What is an appropriate
threshold for the number of reads, relative to what standard(s)?
How should reproducibility be reported? What transcripts should
be annotated? More universal platforms for sharing, analyzing,
and storing data and uniformity in transcriptome annotation will
greatly facilitate the utilization of the data and the application
of bioinformatic screens. Ironically, the vast volume of data itself
ultimately may result in barriers to its use.
Beyond the difficulties of reporting and evaluating deep
sequencing data, even greater challenges lie in further validation
of the identified transcripts and determination of their functions.
For instance, what experiments, if any, need to be done to further
validate and determine the ends of transcripts detected by deep
sequencing? Northern analysis typically has been the standard
for validating candidate sRNAs identified by other approaches.
In addition to validating expression, northern analysis provides
information about size and potential processing. Identification
of 50 ends of RNAs by deep sequencing is often robust, but identification of the 30 ends has been less reliable. Finally, the possibility that the newly identified transcripts may encode small
proteins that are frequently missed during genome annotation
needs to be considered.
Thus far, the elucidation of sRNA function for both base-pairing and protein-binding sRNAs has proceeded with the detailed
characterization of individual sRNAs. While this approach has
been fruitful, without higher throughput approaches, it will take

years to characterize the hundreds of sRNAs now being reported. Collections of tagged sRNA deletion strains and libraries
of sRNA overexpression plasmids are available in E. coli and
Salmonella (Hobbs et al., 2010; Mandin and Gottesman, 2010;
Papenfort et al., 2008). However, some of the phenotypes associated with decreased or increased expression of known sRNAs
are subtle and may only be observed under specific conditions
or in sensitized backgrounds. High-throughput competition
screens with mixed cultures have been successful in identifying
phenotypes but require uniquely tagged strains. Alternatively,
individual mutants can be arrayed such that a particular sRNA
deletion can be compared to all other deletion strains under
a wide range of conditions or easily moved into other mutant
backgrounds (Nichols et al., 2011).
There are some caveats to the current global approaches
for finding phenotypes for sRNA regulators as a method to
uncover function, particularly for the asRNAs prevalent in the
deep sequencing approaches. Foremost, it is difficult to delete
asRNA genes without affecting the oppositely encoded gene.
An alternative approach may be to construct libraries overexpressing RNAs that are complementary to the asRNA with the
intent of blocking the activity of the asRNA (an anti-antisense
strategy). For RNAs with dual functions, such as the E. coli
SgrS, S. aureus RNase III, B. subtilis SR1, and Pseudomonas
aeruginosa PhrS sRNAs that encode proteins and function as
regulatory RNAs (reviewed in Vanderpool et al., 2011), it may
be challenging to discern the effects of the regulatory RNA
activity from the effects of the encoded protein, especially since
translation of the peptide could impact the riboregulatory
activity. It is conceivable that some mRNAs act as RNA regulators as well, raising the possibility that the number of trans-acting
regulatory RNAs is even higher than the hundreds of sRNAs and
asRNAs already being reported.
The Awesome Power of Studying sRNAs in Bacteria
As we move beyond our understanding of individual sRNA functions and how they integrate into known networks, sRNAs
undoubtedly will serve as fodder for broader questions about
bacterial physiology and evolution. It already is clear that sRNAs
serve as diverse regulators that impact almost every aspect of
bacterial physiology. Therefore, understanding the ways that
bacteria respond to and influence communities and how they
survive such diverse environments will benefit from further
studies of sRNAs. The breadth of bacterial species with fully
sequenced genomes, coupled with the available genome
sequences of multiple isolates of the same species, enables
comparisons that are likely to help elucidate the evolution of
sRNA regulators and the advantages provided by sRNA-based
regulation. In addition, the ability to conduct evolution experiments involving thousands of generations is unique to the bacterial world. An ongoing, long-term evolution experiment with
E. coli has not yet revealed critical changes in sRNA genes
(Barrick et al., 2009). However, in Myxococcus xanthus, a spontaneous mutation that abolished the regulatory function of the Pxr
RNA, thereby restoring developmental proficiency in a population lacking this capacity, was identified in a short-term evolution
experiment (Yu et al., 2010). It will be interesting to perform
these types of experiments using otherwise isogenic strains
Molecular Cell 43, September 16, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc. 887

Molecular Cell

Review
manipulated to examine the effects of having a particular node
regulated by a protein or an sRNA.
The use of sRNAs as diagnostic tools and platforms for the
development of antimicrobial therapies has long been suggested
as an important outcome of sRNA studies. The promoters
controlling expression of sRNAs are among the most sensitive
for any particular stress and thus might serve as good reporters
of conditions encountered by a cell (Mutalik et al., 2009). More
and more sRNAs have been found that are induced by contact
with a host cell, some of which impact survival in the host (reviewed in Papenfort and Vogel, 2010). For example, the lack of
6S RNA significantly affected L. pneumophila growth in a human
cell line (Faucher et al., 2010). In addition, many sRNAs remodel
metabolic flux. Therapies that take advantage of these observations are attractive but remain in early stages of development (reviewed in Isaacs et al., 2006). Another interesting but unresolved
question is whether RNAs are ever exchanged between a bacterium and a host, perhaps acting as regulators or signaling molecules in a heterologous bacterium or eukaryotic cell.
Finally, there are many universal regulatory RNA-based questions for which bacteria may provide opportunities for study not
afforded by higher organisms. For instance, the ease in growing
and manipulating large quantities of many bacterial species,
combined with a smaller number of genes per genome, will facilitate the measurement of important parameters including RNA
concentrations and affinities as well as the dynamics of RNARNA and RNA-protein interactions. Directed in vivo selection
experiments also may further elucidate critical sequences and
structures. Such information will be necessary for the development and testing of models for the roles of RNAs in regulatory
networks. The facility of using bacteria and well-studied sRNAs
that can be utilized as proofs of principal also should allow for
the enhanced development of techniques for studying RNAs in
all organisms at both single cell- and population-wide levels.
Clearly there are many exciting frontiers and unanswered
questions in research on bacterial sRNAs. It is likely that important insights will come from breakthroughs in methodology. We
anticipate that these will be in the form of high-resolution structures of sRNAs, their targets and the proteins involved, further
exploitation of global approaches for identifying sRNAs and
examining the binding of critical proteins, and visualization of
the subcellular localization of RNAs in bacteria. However,
continued characterization of individual sRNAs undoubtedly
also will uncover new insights, new regulatory mechanisms
and novel connections within bacterial physiology.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank K. Fo¨rstner for help with Figure 3, many colleagues for their
comments, and the participants of the 2011 ASM Conference on Regulating
with RNA in Bacteria for discussion, which stimulated many of the ideas in
this review.

REFERENCES
Afonyushkin, T., Vecerek, B., Moll, I., Bla¨si, U., and Kaberdin, V.R. (2005). Both
RNase E and RNase III control the stability of sodB mRNA upon translational
inhibition by the small regulatory RNA RyhB. Nucleic Acids Res. 33, 1678–
1689.

888 Molecular Cell 43, September 16, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc.

Babitzke, P., and Romeo, T. (2007). CsrB sRNA family: sequestration of RNAbinding regulatory proteins. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 10, 156–163.
Backofen, R., and Hess, W.R. (2010). Computational prediction of sRNAs and
their targets in bacteria. RNA Biol. 7, 33–42.
Balbontı´n, R., Fiorini, F., Figueroa-Bossi, N., Casadesu´s, J., and Bossi, L.
(2010). Recognition of heptameric seed sequence underlies multi-target regulation by RybB small RNA in Salmonella enterica. Mol. Microbiol. 78, 380–394.
Barrick, J.E., Yu, D.S., Yoon, S.H., Jeong, H., Oh, T.K., Schneider, D., Lenski,
R.E., and Kim, J.F. (2009). Genome evolution and adaptation in a long-term
experiment with Escherichia coli. Nature 461, 1243–1247.
Bartel, D.P. (2009). MicroRNAs: target recognition and regulatory functions.
Cell 136, 215–233.
Battesti, A., Majdalani, N., and Gottesman, S. (2010). The RpoS-mediated
general stress response in Escherichia coli. Annu. Rev. Microbiol., in press.
Published online September 28, 2010. 10.1146/annurev-micro-090110102946.
Beisel, C.L., and Storz, G. (2010). Base pairing small RNAs and their roles in
global regulatory networks. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 34, 866–882.
Beisel, C.L., and Storz, G. (2011). The base-pairing RNA spot 42 participates in
a multioutput feedforward loop to help enact catabolite repression in Escherichia coli. Mol. Cell 41, 286–297.
Bohn, C., Rigoulay, C., Chabelskaya, S., Sharma, C.M., Marchais, A., Skorski,
P., Boreze´e-Durant, E., Barbet, R., Jacquet, E., Jacq, A., et al. (2010). Experimental discovery of small RNAs in Staphylococcus aureus reveals a riboregulator of central metabolism. Nucleic Acids Res. 38, 6620–6636.
Bouvier, M., Sharma, C.M., Mika, F., Nierhaus, K.H., and Vogel, J. (2008).
Small RNA binding to 50 mRNA coding region inhibits translational initiation.
Mol. Cell 32, 827–837.
Brantl, S. (2007). Regulatory mechanisms employed by cis-encoded antisense
RNAs. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 10, 102–109.
Breaker, R.R. (2011). Prospects for riboswitch discovery and analysis. Mol.
Cell 43, this issue, 867–879.
Caron, M.P., Lafontaine, D.A., and Masse´, E. (2010). Small RNA-mediated
regulation at the level of transcript stability. RNA Biol. 7, 140–144.
Cavanagh, A.T., Klocko, A.D., Liu, X., and Wassarman, K.M. (2008). Promoter
specificity for 6S RNA regulation of transcription is determined by core
promoter sequences and competition for region 4.2 of sigma70. Mol. Microbiol.
67, 1242–1256.
Cavanagh, A.T., Chandrangsu, P., and Wassarman, K.M. (2010). 6S RNA regulation of relA alters ppGpp levels in early stationary phase. Microbiology 156,
3791–3800.
Chabelskaya, S., Gaillot, O., and Felden, B. (2010). A Staphylococcus aureus
small RNA is required for bacterial virulence and regulates the expression of
an immune-evasion molecule. PLoS Pathog. 6, e1000927.
Chae, H., Han, K., Kim, K.S., Park, H., Lee, J., and Lee, Y. (2011). Rho-dependent termination of ssrS (6S RNA) transcription in Escherichia coli: implication
for 30 processing of 6S RNA and expression of downstream ygfA (putative
5-formyl-tetrahydrofolate cyclo-ligase). J. Biol. Chem. 286, 114–122.
Chant, E.L., and Summers, D.K. (2007). Indole signalling contributes to the
stable maintenance of Escherichia coli multicopy plasmids. Mol. Microbiol.
63, 35–43.
Chaulk, S.G., Smith Frieday, M.N., Arthur, D.C., Culham, D.E., Edwards, R.A.,
Soo, P., Frost, L.S., Keates, R.A.B., Glover, J.N.M., and Wood, J.M. (2011).
ProQ is an RNA chaperone that controls ProP levels in Escherichia coli.
Biochemistry 50, 3095–3106.
Coornaert, A., Lu, A., Mandin, P., Springer, M., Gottesman, S., and Guillier, M.
(2010). MicA sRNA links the PhoP regulon to cell envelope stress. Mol. Microbiol. 76, 467–479.
Croucher, N.J., and Thomson, N.R. (2010). Studying bacterial transcriptomes
using RNA-seq. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 13, 619–624.

Molecular Cell

Review
Davis, B.M., and Waldor, M.K. (2007). RNase E-dependent processing stabilizes MicX, a Vibrio cholerae sRNA. Mol. Microbiol. 65, 373–385.

Isaacs, F.J., Dwyer, D.J., and Collins, J.J. (2006). RNA synthetic biology. Nat.
Biotechnol. 24, 545–554.

De Lay, N., and Gottesman, S. (2009). The Crp-activated small noncoding
regulatory RNA CyaR (RyeE) links nutritional status to group behavior. J. Bacteriol. 191, 461–476.

Johansen, J., Eriksen, M., Kallipolitis, B., and Valentin-Hansen, P. (2008).
Down-regulation of outer membrane proteins by noncoding RNAs: unraveling
the cAMP-CRP- and sigmaE-dependent CyaR-ompX regulatory case. J. Mol.
Biol. 383, 1–9.

De Lay, N., and Gottesman, S. (2011). Role of polynucleotide phosphorylase in
sRNA function in Escherichia coli. RNA 17, 1172–1189.
Desnoyers, G., Morissette, A., Pre´vost, K., and Masse´, E. (2009). Small RNAinduced differential degradation of the polycistronic mRNA iscRSUA. EMBO J.
28, 1551–1561.
Faucher, S.P., Friedlander, G., Livny, J., Margalit, H., and Shuman, H.A. (2010).
Legionella pneumophila 6S RNA optimizes intracellular multiplication. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107, 7533–7538.

Kawamoto, H., Morita, T., Shimizu, A., Inada, T., and Aiba, H. (2005). Implication of membrane localization of target mRNA in the action of a small RNA:
mechanism of post-transcriptional regulation of glucose transporter in
Escherichia coli. Genes Dev. 19, 328–338.
Kawamoto, H., Koide, Y., Morita, T., and Aiba, H. (2006). Base-pairing requirement for RNA silencing by a bacterial small RNA and acceleration of duplex
formation by Hfq. Mol. Microbiol. 61, 1013–1022.

Fender, A., Elf, J., Hampel, K., Zimmermann, B., and Wagner, E.G.H. (2010).
RNAs actively cycle on the Sm-like protein Hfq. Genes Dev. 24, 2621–2626.

Klocko, A.D., and Wassarman, K.M. (2009). 6S RNA binding to Esigma(70)
requires a positively charged surface of sigma(70) region 4.2. Mol. Microbiol.
73, 152–164.

Figueroa-Bossi, N., Valentini, M., Malleret, L., Fiorini, F., and Bossi, L. (2009).
Caught at its own game: regulatory small RNA inactivated by an inducible transcript mimicking its target. Genes Dev. 23, 2004–2015.

Landt, S.G., Lesley, J.A., Britos, L., and Shapiro, L. (2010). CrfA, a small noncoding RNA regulator of adaptation to carbon starvation in Caulobacter crescentus. J. Bacteriol. 192, 4763–4775.

Fro¨hlich, K.S., and Vogel, J. (2009). Activation of gene expression by small
RNA. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 12, 674–682.

Levine, E., and Hwa, T. (2008). Small RNAs establish gene expression thresholds. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 11, 574–579.

Geissmann, T., Chevalier, C., Cros, M.J., Boisset, S., Fechter, P., Noirot, C.,
Schrenzel, J., Franc¸ois, P., Vandenesch, F., Gaspin, C., and Romby, P.
(2009). A search for small noncoding RNAs in Staphylococcus aureus reveals
a conserved sequence motif for regulation. Nucleic Acids Res. 37, 7239–7257.

Levine, E., Zhang, Z., Kuhlman, T., and Hwa, T. (2007). Quantitative characteristics of gene regulation by small RNA. PLoS Biol. 5, e229.

Georg, J., and Hess, W.R. (2011). cis-antisense RNA, another level of gene
regulation in bacteria. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 75, 286–300.
Gogol, E.B., Rhodius, V.A., Papenfort, K., Vogel, J., and Gross, C.A. (2011).
Small RNAs endow a transcriptional activator with essential repressor functions for single-tier control of a global stress regulon. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 108, 12875–12880.
Guillier, M., and Gottesman, S. (2008). The 50 end of two redundant sRNAs is
involved in the regulation of multiple targets, including their own regulator. Nucleic Acids Res. 36, 6781–6794.

Licatalosi, D.D., and Darnell, R.B. (2010). RNA processing and its regulation:
global insights into biological networks. Nat. Rev. Genet. 11, 75–87.
Link, T.M., Valentin-Hansen, P., and Brennan, R.G. (2009). Structure of
Escherichia coli Hfq bound to polyriboadenylate RNA. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 106, 19292–19297.
Loh, E., Dussurget, O., Gripenland, J., Vaitkevicius, K., Tiensuu, T., Mandin, P.,
Repoila, F., Buchrieser, C., Cossart, P., and Johansson, J. (2009). A transacting riboswitch controls expression of the virulence regulator PrfA in Listeria
monocytogenes. Cell 139, 770–779.

Han, K., Kim, K.S., Bak, G., Park, H., and Lee, Y. (2010). Recognition and
discrimination of target mRNAs by Sib RNAs, a cis-encoded sRNA family. Nucleic Acids Res. 38, 5851–5866.

Lorenz, C., Gesell, T., Zimmermann, B., Schoeberl, U., Bilusic, I., Rajkowitsch,
L., Waldsich, C., von Haeseler, A., and Schroeder, R. (2010). Genomic SELEX
for Hfq-binding RNAs identifies genomic aptamers predominantly in antisense
transcripts. Nucleic Acids Res. 38, 3794–3808.

Hao, Y., Zhang, Z.J., Erickson, D.W., Huang, M., Huang, Y., Li, J., Hwa, T., and
Shi, H. (2011). Quantifying the sequence-function relation in gene silencing by
bacterial small RNAs. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108, 12473–12478.

Lybecker, M.C., Abel, C.A., Feig, A.L., and Samuels, D.S. (2010). Identification
and function of the RNA chaperone Hfq in the Lyme disease spirochete
Borrelia burgdorferi. Mol. Microbiol. 78, 622–635.

Hobbs, E.C., Astarita, J.L., and Storz, G. (2010). Small RNAs and small
proteins involved in resistance to cell envelope stress and acid shock in
Escherichia coli: analysis of a bar-coded mutant collection. J. Bacteriol. 192,
59–67.

Maki, K., Morita, T., Otaka, H., and Aiba, H. (2010). A minimal base-pairing
region of a bacterial small RNA SgrS required for translational repression of
ptsG mRNA. Mol. Microbiol. 76, 782–792.

Holmqvist, E., Reimega˚rd, J., Sterk, M., Grantcharova, N., Ro¨mling, U., and
Wagner, E.G.H. (2010). Two antisense RNAs target the transcriptional regulator CsgD to inhibit curli synthesis. EMBO J. 29, 1840–1850.
Hopkins, J.F., Panja, S., and Woodson, S.A. (2011). Rapid binding and release
of Hfq from ternary complexes during RNA annealing. Nucleic Acids Res. 39,
5193–5202.
Huntzinger, E., Boisset, S., Saveanu, C., Benito, Y., Geissmann, T., Namane,
A., Lina, G., Etienne, J., Ehresmann, B., Ehresmann, C., et al. (2005).
Staphylococcus aureus RNAIII and the endoribonuclease III coordinately regulate spa gene expression. EMBO J. 24, 824–835.
Hussein, R., and Lim, H.N. (2011). Disruption of small RNA signaling caused by
competition for Hfq. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108, 1110–1115.
Hwang, W., Arluison, V., and Hohng, S. (2011). Dynamic competition of DsrA
and rpoS fragments for the proximal binding site of Hfq as a means for efficient
annealing. Nucleic Acids Res. 39, 5131–5139.
Ikeda, Y., Yagi, M., Morita, T., and Aiba, H. (2011). Hfq binding at RhlB-recognition region of RNase E is crucial for the rapid degradation of target mRNAs
mediated by sRNAs in Escherichia coli. Mol. Microbiol. 79, 419–432.

Mandin, P., and Gottesman, S. (2010). Integrating anaerobic/aerobic sensing
and the general stress response through the ArcZ small RNA. EMBO J. 29,
3094–3107.
Masse´, E., Escorcia, F.E., and Gottesman, S. (2003). Coupled degradation of
a small regulatory RNA and its mRNA targets in Escherichia coli. Genes Dev.
17, 2374–2383.
Masse´, E., Vanderpool, C.K., and Gottesman, S. (2005). Effect of RyhB small
RNA on global iron use in Escherichia coli. J. Bacteriol. 187, 6962–6971.
Meisner, N.C., and Filipowicz, W. (2011). Properties of the regulatory RNAbinding protein HuR and its role in controlling miRNA repression. Adv. Exp.
Med. Biol. 700, 106–123.
Mitschke, J., Georg, J., Scholz, I., Sharma, C.M., Dienst, D., Bantscheff, J.,
Voss, B., Steglich, C., Wilde, A., Vogel, J., and Hess, W.R. (2011). An experimentally anchored map of transcriptional start sites in the model cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC6803. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108, 2124–2129.
Moreno, R., Marzi, S., Romby, P., and Rojo, F. (2009). The Crc global regulator
binds to an unpaired A-rich motif at the Pseudomonas putida alkS mRNA
coding sequence and inhibits translation initiation. Nucleic Acids Res. 37,
7678–7690.

Molecular Cell 43, September 16, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc. 889

Molecular Cell

Review
Mutalik, V.K., Nonaka, G., Ades, S.E., Rhodius, V.A., and Gross, C.A. (2009).
Promoter strength properties of the complete sigma E regulon of Escherichia
coli and Salmonella enterica. J. Bacteriol. 191, 7279–7287.

and full virulence of Burkholderia cenocepacia J2315. J. Bacteriol. 193,
1515–1526.

Neusser, T., Polen, T., Geissen, R., and Wagner, R. (2010). Depletion of the
non-coding regulatory 6S RNA in E. coli causes a surprising reduction in the
expression of the translation machinery. BMC Genomics 11, 165.

Reichenbach, B., Maes, A., Kalamorz, F., Hajnsdorf, E., and Go¨rke, B. (2008).
The small RNA GlmY acts upstream of the sRNA GlmZ in the activation of
glmS expression and is subject to regulation by polyadenylation in Escherichia
coli. Nucleic Acids Res. 36, 2570–2580.

Nichols, R.J., Sen, S., Choo, Y.J., Beltrao, P., Zietek, M., Chaba, R., Lee, S.,
Kazmierczak, K.M., Lee, K.J., Wong, A., et al. (2011). Phenotypic landscape
of a bacterial cell. Cell 144, 143–156.

Rutherford, S.T., van Kessel, J.C., Shao, Y., and Bassler, B.L. (2011). AphA and
LuxR/HapR reciprocally control quorum sensing in vibrios. Genes Dev. 25,
397–408.

Nielsen, J.S., Lei, L.K., Ebersbach, T., Olsen, A.S., Klitgaard, J.K., ValentinHansen, P., and Kallipolitis, B.H. (2010). Defining a role for Hfq in Gram-positive bacteria: evidence for Hfq-dependent antisense regulation in Listeria
monocytogenes. Nucleic Acids Res. 38, 907–919.

Salvail, H., Lanthier-Bourbonnais, P., Sobota, J.M., Caza, M., Benjamin, J.A.,
Mendieta, M.E., Le´pine, F., Dozois, C.M., Imlay, J., and Masse´, E. (2010). A
small RNA promotes siderophore production through transcriptional and
metabolic remodeling. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107, 15223–15228.

Obana, N., Shirahama, Y., Abe, K., and Nakamura, K. (2010). Stabilization of
Clostridium perfringens collagenase mRNA by VR-RNA-dependent cleavage
in 50 leader sequence. Mol. Microbiol. 77, 1416–1428.

Sauer, E., and Weichenrieder, O. (2011). Structural basis for RNA 30 -end
recognition by Hfq. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108, 13065–13070.
Seitz, H. (2009). Redefining microRNA targets. Curr. Biol. 19, 870–873.

Olejniczak, M. (2011). Despite similar binding to the Hfq protein regulatory
RNAs widely differ in their competition performance. Biochemistry 50, 4427–
4440.
Opdyke, J.A., Fozo, E.M., Hemm, M.R., and Storz, G. (2011). RNase III participates in GadY-dependent cleavage of the gadX-gadW mRNA. J. Mol. Biol.
406, 29–43.
Otaka, H., Ishikawa, H., Morita, T., and Aiba, H. (2011). PolyU tail of rho-independent terminator of bacterial small RNAs is essential for Hfq action. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108, 13059–13064.
Overgaard, M., Johansen, J., Møller-Jensen, J., and Valentin-Hansen, P.
(2009). Switching off small RNA regulation with trap-mRNA. Mol. Microbiol.
73, 790–800.
Pandey, S.P., Minesinger, B.K., Kumar, J., and Walker, G.C. (2011). A highly
conserved protein of unknown function in Sinorhizobium meliloti affects
sRNA regulation similar to Hfq. Nucleic Acids Res. 39, 4691–4708.
Papenfort, K., and Vogel, J. (2010). Regulatory RNA in bacterial pathogens.
Cell Host Microbe 8, 116–127.
Papenfort, K., Pfeiffer, V., Mika, F., Lucchini, S., Hinton, J.C., and Vogel, J.
(2006). SigmaE-dependent small RNAs of Salmonella respond to membrane
stress by accelerating global omp mRNA decay. Mol. Microbiol. 62, 1674–
1688.
Papenfort, K., Pfeiffer, V., Lucchini, S., Sonawane, A., Hinton, J.C., and Vogel,
J. (2008). Systematic deletion of Salmonella small RNA genes identifies CyaR,
a conserved CRP-dependent riboregulator of OmpX synthesis. Mol. Microbiol.
68, 890–906.

Sharma, C.M., and Vogel, J. (2009). Experimental approaches for the
discovery and characterization of regulatory small RNA. Curr. Opin. Microbiol.
12, 536–546.
Sharma, C.M., Hoffmann, S., Darfeuille, F., Reignier, J., Findeiss, S., Sittka, A.,
Chabas, S., Reiche, K., Hackermu¨ller, J., Reinhardt, R., et al. (2010). The
primary transcriptome of the major human pathogen Helicobacter pylori.
Nature 464, 250–255.
Sharma, C.M., Papenfort, K., Pernitzsch, S.R., Mollenkopf, H.-J., Hinton,
J.C.D., and Vogel, J. (2011). Pervasive post-transcriptional control of genes
involved in amino acid metabolism by the Hfq-dependent GcvB small RNA.
Mol. Microbiol., in press. Published online June 23, 2011.
Sonnleitner, E., and Haas, D. (2011). Small RNAs as regulators of primary and
secondary metabolism in Pseudomonas species. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.
91, 63–79.
Sonnleitner, E., Abdou, L., and Haas, D. (2009). Small RNA as global regulator
of carbon catabolite repression in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 106, 21866–21871.
Soper, T., Mandin, P., Majdalani, N., Gottesman, S., and Woodson, S.A.
(2010). Positive regulation by small RNAs and the role of Hfq. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 107, 9602–9607.
Suzuki, H.I., and Miyazono, K. (2011). Emerging complexity of microRNA
generation cascades. J. Biochem. 149, 15–25.
Suzuki, K., Babitzke, P., Kushner, S.R., and Romeo, T. (2006). Identification of
a novel regulatory protein (CsrD) that targets the global regulatory RNAs CsrB
and CsrC for degradation by RNase E. Genes Dev. 20, 2605–2617.

Papenfort, K., Said, N., Welsink, T., Lucchini, S., Hinton, J.C., and Vogel, J.
(2009). Specific and pleiotropic patterns of mRNA regulation by ArcZ,
a conserved, Hfq-dependent small RNA. Mol. Microbiol. 74, 139–158.

Thomason, M.K., and Storz, G. (2010). Bacterial antisense RNAs: how many
are there, and what are they doing? Annu. Rev. Genet. 44, 167–188.

Papenfort, K., Bouvier, M., Mika, F., Sharma, C.M., and Vogel, J. (2010).
Evidence for an autonomous 50 target recognition domain in an Hfq-associated small RNA. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107, 20435–20440.

Updegrove, T., Wilf, N., Sun, X., and Wartell, R.M. (2008). Effect of Hfq on
RprA-rpoS mRNA pairing: Hfq-RNA binding and the influence of the 50 rpoS
mRNA leader region. Biochemistry 47, 11184–11195.

Peer, A., and Margalit, H. (2011). Accessibility and evolutionary conservation
mark bacterial small-rna target-binding regions. J. Bacteriol. 193, 1690–1701.

Urban, J.H., and Vogel, J. (2007). Translational control and target recognition
by Escherichia coli small RNAs in vivo. Nucleic Acids Res. 35, 1018–1037.

Pfeiffer, V., Papenfort, K., Lucchini, S., Hinton, J.C., and Vogel, J. (2009).
Coding sequence targeting by MicC RNA reveals bacterial mRNA silencing
downstream of translational initiation. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 16, 840–846.

Urban, J.H., and Vogel, J. (2008). Two seemingly homologous noncoding
RNAs act hierarchically to activate glmS mRNA translation. PLoS Biol. 6, e64.

Pre´vost, K., Desnoyers, G., Jacques, J.F., Lavoie, F., and Masse´, E. (2011).
Small RNA-induced mRNA degradation achieved through both translation
block and activated cleavage. Genes Dev. 25, 385–396.

Vanderpool, C.K., Balasubramanian, D., and Lloyd, C.R. (2011). Dual-function
RNA regulators in bacteria. Biochimie, in press. Published online July 24, 2011.
Vecerek, B., Moll, I., and Bla¨si, U. (2007). Control of Fur synthesis by the noncoding RNA RyhB and iron-responsive decoding. EMBO J. 26, 965–975.

Ramirez-Pen˜a, E., Trevin˜o, J., Liu, Z., Perez, N., and Sumby, P. (2010). The
group A Streptococcus small regulatory RNA FasX enhances streptokinase
activity by increasing the stability of the ska mRNA transcript. Mol. Microbiol.
78, 1332–1347.

Viegas, S.C., Silva, I.J., Saramago, M., Domingues, S., and Arraiano, C.M.
(2011). Regulation of the small regulatory RNA MicA by ribonuclease III:
a target-dependent pathway. Nucleic Acids Res. 39, 2918–2930.

Ramos, C.G., Sousa, S.A., Grilo, A.M., Feliciano, J.R., and Leita˜o, J.H. (2011).
The second RNA chaperone, Hfq2, is also required for survival under stress

Vogel, J., and Luisi, B.F. (2011). Hfq and its constellation of RNA. Nat. Rev.
Microbiol. 9, 578–589.

890 Molecular Cell 43, September 16, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc.

Molecular Cell

Review
Wagner, E.G.H., Altuvia, S., and Romby, P. (2002). Antisense RNAs in bacteria
and their genetic elements. Adv. Genet. 46, 361–398.
Wassarman, K.M. (2007). 6S RNA: a regulator of transcription. Mol. Microbiol.
65, 1425–1431.

Weissenmayer, B.A., Prendergast, J.G., Lohan, A.J., and Loftus, B.J. (2011).
Sequencing illustrates the transcriptional response of Legionella pneumophila
during infection and identifies seventy novel small non-coding RNAs. PLoS
One 6, e17570.

Wassarman, K.M., Zhang, A., and Storz, G. (1999). Small RNAs in Escherichia
coli. Trends Microbiol. 7, 37–45.

Willkomm, D.K., and Hartmann, R.K. (2005). 6S RNA - an ancient regulator of
bacterial RNA polymerase rediscovered. Biol. Chem. 386, 1273–1277.

Waters, L.S., and Storz, G. (2009). Regulatory RNAs in bacteria. Cell 136,
615–628.

Yu, Y.T., Yuan, X., and Velicer, G.J. (2010). Adaptive evolution of an sRNA that
controls Myxococcus development. Science 328, 993.

Molecular Cell 43, September 16, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc. 891

