Molecular Cell

Review
Autophagy and the Integrated Stress Response
Guido Kroemer,1,2,3,4,5,* Guillermo Marin˜o,1,2 and Beth Levine6,7,8,*
1INSERM,

U848, 39 rue Calmette Desmoulins, 94805 Villejuif, France
Platform, Institut Gustave Roussy, Pavillon de Recherche 1, 94805 Villejuif, France
3Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, 15 rue de l’Ecole de Me
´ decine, 75006 Paris, France
4Po
ˆ le de Biologie, Hoˆpital Europe´en Georges Pompidou, AP-HP, 20 rue Leblanc, 75015 Paris, France
5Universite
´ Paris Descartes, Faculte´ de Me´decine, 15 rue de l’Ecole de Me´decine, 75006 Paris, France
6Department of Internal Medicine
7Department of Microbiology
8Howard Hughes Medical Institute
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390, USA
*Correspondence: kroemer@orange.fr (G.K.), beth.levine@utsouthwestern.edu (B.L.)
DOI 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.09.023
2Metabolomics

Autophagy is a tightly regulated pathway involving the lysosomal degradation of cytoplasmic organelles or
cytosolic components. This pathway can be stimulated by multiple forms of cellular stress, including nutrient
or growth factor deprivation, hypoxia, reactive oxygen species, DNA damage, protein aggregates, damaged
organelles, or intracellular pathogens. Both specific, stimulus-dependent and more general, stimulus-independent signaling pathways are activated to coordinate different phases of autophagy. Autophagy can be
integrated with other cellular stress responses through parallel stimulation of autophagy and other stress
responses by specific stress stimuli, through dual regulation of autophagy and other stress responses by
multifunctional stress signaling molecules, and/or through mutual control of autophagy and other stress
responses. Thus, autophagy is a cell biological process that is a central component of the integrated stress
response.
Introduction
Eukaryotic cells must adapt continuously to fluctuations in
external conditions, including physical parameters such as
temperature and ultraviolet light; chemical cues such as ion
concentrations, pH, oxygen tension, redox potentials, and metabolite concentrations; extracellular signals such as contact-dependent signals, hormones, cytokines, and neurotransmitters; and
microbial pathogens. Beyond a certain threshold, such fluctuations are considered ‘‘stresses,’’ meaning that the cell’s response
to this stress determines whether it can function properly and
survive.
During the response to sublethal stress, cells undergo rapid
changes to adapt their metabolism and protect themselves
against potential damage. This is orchestrated through a multifaceted cellular program, which involves the concerted action
of diverse stress response pathways. One of the key pathways
that mediates stress-induced metabolic adaptation and damage
control is macroautophagy, referred to simply as ‘‘autophagy.’’
During autophagy, cells form double-membraned vesicles, autophagosomes, that sequester organelles, proteins, or portions of
the cytoplasm for delivery to the lysosome (He and Klionsky,
2009). The sequestered contents are degraded in the lysosome,
allowing cells to eliminate damaged or harmful components
through catabolism and recycling to maintain nutrient and
energy homeostasis. Autophagy constitutes a major protective
mechanism that allows cells to survive in response to multiple
stressors and that helps defend organisms against degenerative, inflammatory, infectious, and neoplastic diseases (Levine
and Kroemer, 2008; Mizushima et al., 2008).
Besides autophagy, the cellular response to stress involves
numerous other pathways including those that regulate nutrient
280 Molecular Cell 40, October 22, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc.

uptake, intermediary metabolism, cell cycle and growth control,
cell fate and lineage decisions, and cellular survival/death
programs. Therefore, it is not surprising that there is a close integration between signals that regulate these cellular processes
and those that regulate autophagy. In this review, we will
summarize recent advances in understanding how different
cellular stress signals and stress stimuli regulate autophagy.
The Core Pathway of Mammalian Autophagy
The core pathway of mammalian autophagy (Figure 1) begins
with the formation of an isolation membrane (also called a phagophore) and involves at least five molecular components,
including (1) the Atg1/unc-51-like kinase (ULK) complex; (2) the
Beclin 1/class III phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) complex;
(3) two transmembrane proteins, Atg9 and vacuole membrane
protein 1 (VMP1); (4) two ubiquitin-like protein (Atg12 and
Atg8/LC3) conjugation systems; and (5) proteins that mediate
fusion between autophagosomes and lysosomes (Yang and
Klionsky, 2010). Some of these core autophagy pathway components are directly controlled by cellular stress signals (Figure 1).
Origin of the Isolation Membrane
The isolation membrane can be generated from multiple sources
that include the ER (Axe et al., 2008; Hayashi-Nishino et al., 2009;
Yla-Anttila et al., 2009), the outer mitochondrial membrane
(Hailey et al., 2010), and the plasma membrane (Ravikumar
et al., 2010). PI3P is required for the formation of ‘‘omegasomes,’’ the U-shaped structures that bud from the ER during
the initial steps of vesicle nucleation/autophagosome formation
(Axe et al., 2008). ATG16L1 directly interacts with clathrin, which
connects the endocytic pathway to autophagy (Ravikumar et al.,
2010). While it appears that general autophagy inducers such as

Molecular Cell

Review

Figure 1. Overview of the Major Components of the Core Pathway of Mammalian Autophagy
Several key molecular components participate in the initiation, execution, and completion of autophagy. Autophagy inducers such as starvation modulate the
inhibitory interaction of TORC1 with the ULK1/2 complex. Through phosphorylation of Ambra1, and maybe through other putative interactions, ULK1/2 complex
(A) also regulates the activity of Beclin 1/class III phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) complex (B). Beclin 1 interacts with several enhancing (blue) or inhibitory
(gray) factors that modulate its binding to Vps34, the catalytic unit of the PI3K, whose lipid kinase activity is essential for autophagy. In addition to these two
complexes, autophagosome formation requires the participation of two ubiquitin-like protein (Atg12 and Atg8/LC3) conjugation systems and two transmembrane
proteins (Atg9 and VMP-1) (C). Whereas the roles of Atg9 and VMP-1 are currently not completely understood, both conjugation systems are essential for the
biogenesis of the isolation membrane, also called ‘‘phagophore.’’ In addition, the Atg8/LC3 system is required for autophagosome transport and maturation,
as well as for the selection of autophagic cargo. Fully mature autophagosomes can fuse with Rab7-positive late endosomes to form amphisomes. Finally, autophagosomes or amphisomes fuse their external membranes with those from acidic lysosomes to acquire hydrolytic activity, degrade their cargo, and recycle
essential biomolecules to the cytoplasm (D).

starvation stimulate lipid recruitment from all known sources, it is
not known whether specific stimuli (such as ER stress, mitochondrial damage, or signals emanating from the plasma membrane)
cause autophagosomes to be preferentially formed from specific
membrane sources.
The Atg1/ULK Complex
The mammalian orthologs of yeast Atg1, ULK1 and ULK2, play
a key role in autophagy induction, acting downstream of the
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) complex 1 (mTORC1,
a polyprotein complex that contains mTOR, Raptor, mLST8/
GßL, Deptor, and PRAS40 [Efeyan and Sabatini, 2010]). In
normal (nutrient-replete) conditions, mTORC1 possesses kinase
activity and interacts with a complex that contains ULK1, Atg13,
FIP200, and Atg101 (Figure 1A). Upon mTORC1 inhibition, for

example by starvation (see below), mTORC1 dissociates from
the ULK complex, leading to dephosphorylation of specific residues within ULK1 (or ULK2) and Atg13 (which are normally phosphorylated by mTORC1), the catalytic activation of ULK1
(or ULK2), and the ULK1- (or ULK2-) mediated phosphorylation
of other residues in Atg13 and FIP200 (Figure 1A). Thus,
mTORC1 inhibition is probably coupled to ULK1 (or ULK2) activation through a process that involves dissociation of a large
protein complex and (de)phosphorylation events (Mizushima,
2010). An intriguing, but not yet tested, possibility is that
the ULK1/ULK2 complex might also be positively regulated in
low-energy conditions by its recently described interactions
with several subunits of the energy-sensing kinase, AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) (Behrends et al., 2010). It is not
Molecular Cell 40, October 22, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc. 281

Molecular Cell

Review

Figure 2. Overview of Selected Signal Transduction Pathways that Regulate Autophagy Components that Function in Vesicle Nucleation/
Phagophore Formation
Selected signals that converge on ULK1/2 (A) and the Beclin 1 complex (B) are depicted. Note the multiple positive and negative feedback loops depicted in (A).
For details, see text.

entirely known how ULK1/2 activates downstream components
of the autophagic machinery. However, ULK1 can phosphorylate
Ambra1 (Di Bartolomeo et al., 2010), a component of the Beclin
1/Class III PI3K complex (He and Levine, 2010) (Figure 1A).
There are multiple circuits of positive and negative feedback in
mTORC1-mediated autophagy regulation (Neufeld, 2010) (Figure 2A). Feed-forward mechanisms involve Deptor, PRAS40,
and ULK1/2, which are each inhibited by mTORC1-mediated
phosphorylation and, in turn, inhibit mTOR activity. This may
lead to amplification of initially modest changes in TOR activity.
Negative feedback control is achieved via the products of
autophagy including amino acids as well as via inhibition of S6
kinase, a protein that has mTORCI-dependent activity and which
may be necessary for sustained autophagy (Neufeld, 2010).
Thus, mTORC1 is part of a rheostat that is either switched off
(to inhibit autophagy at the level of ULK1/2) or on (to induce autophagy by ULK1/2 activation, as a result of a positive amplification loop). When on, these effects are self-limited due to the
presence of negative feedback loops (Figure 2A).
Beclin 1 and Its Interactome
The ‘‘Beclin 1 core complex’’ involves Beclin 1, Vps15, Vps34,
and likely Ambra1 (He and Levine, 2010). This multiprotein
complex must be formed for the allosteric activation of the class
III PI3K Vps34 to generate phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate
(PI3P), which recruits effectors such as the double FYVE
domain-containing protein 1 (DFCP1) (Axe et al., 2008) and
WD-repeat protein interacting with phosphoinositides (WIPI)
family proteins (Polson et al., 2010) to mediate the initial stages
of vesicle nucleation/autophagosome formation. Numerous
proteins that interact with Beclin 1 induce or inhibit autophagy
(Figure 1B). Atg14 (also called Atg14L or Barkor, for Beclin
1-associated autophagy-related key regulator) is essential for
PI3K activity and autophagy induction. UVRAG (UV radiation
resistance-associated gene) competes with Atg14 for binding
to Beclin 1 and may promote PI3K activity in a cell-type-specific
fashion and, through interactions with class C Vps/HOPS
complexes, promotes autophagosome fusion with the late endo282 Molecular Cell 40, October 22, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc.

some/lysosome. Bif-1/endophilin B1 interacts with Beclin 1 via
UVRAG to function as a positive regulator of the PI3K complex,
and has an N-BAR domain that may promote membrane curvature (Figure 1B). Rubicon (RUN domain protein as Beclin 1 interacting and cysteine-rich containing) negatively regulates
autophagy (as well as endocytic trafficking) through its interaction with Beclin 1/PI3K complexes (Figure 1B).
Antiapoptotic family members (such as Bcl-2, Bcl-XL, and
Mcl-1) are also important negative regulators of autophagy
through an inhibitory interaction of their BH3-binding groove
with the BH3 domain of Beclin 1 (Maiuri et al., 2007; Pattingre
et al., 2005) (Figure 2B). There are several distinct mechanisms
through which autophagy-inducing signals can disrupt this inhibitory interaction, including competition by proapoptotic BH3only proteins (such as BNIP3, Bad, Bik, Noxa, Puma, and BimEL)
(Maiuri et al., 2007), phosphorylation of the BH3 domain of
Beclin 1 by death-associated protein kinase (DAPK) (Zalckvar
et al., 2009), or phosphorylation of Bcl-2 by c-Jun N-teminal
kinase-1 (JNK1) (Pattingre et al., 2009; Wei et al., 2008). Accordingly, BH3-only proteins (such as BAD in starvation or BNIP3 in
hypoxia) (Bellot et al., 2009; Maiuri et al., 2007) as well as Beclin
1/Bcl-2 dissociating kinases (such as JNK1 in starvation conditions) (Wei et al., 2008) are required for autophagy induction in
response to specific forms of stress.
The inositol-1,4,5 trisphosphate (IP3) receptor, which is an IP3activated calcium channel at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER),
interacts with Beclin 1 indirectly, via Bcl-2 (Figure 2B). Upon
cellular reduction of IP3 levels (or antagonist binding) and starvation, this interaction is disrupted (Vicencio et al., 2009). This
mechanism may explain how agents that cause a reduction of
IP3 levels cause autophagy in an mTOR-independent fashion
(Sarkar et al., 2007). The toll-like receptor (TLR) adaptor molecules MyD88 and TRIF also may interact with Beclin 1, thereby
reducing the binding of Beclin 1 to Bcl-2 and promoting autophagy (Shi and Kehrl, 2008). During TLR4-induced autophagy,
tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR)-associated factor 6,
TRAF6, interacts with Beclin 1 and mediates K63-linked

Molecular Cell

Review
ubiquitination of Beclin 1, which enhances Class III PI3K activity
(Shi and Kehrl, 2010). The protein PINK1, which has been studied
as a serine-threonine kinase that interacts with Parkin to stimulate mitophagy, also interacts with Beclin 1 (Michiorri et al.,
2010). Although it is not clear how all these proteins affect the
overall composition and function of the multiprotein Beclin
1-containing complex, an attractive model is that multiple proteins
directly or indirectly interact with Beclin 1 to relay extracellular and
intracellular stress signals to the autophagic machinery.
Atg9 and VMP1
Atg9 may provide lipids to the isolation membrane by cycling
between distinct subcellular compartments (Figure 1C). The
cycling of Atg9 requires Atg1/ULK1 and the kinase activity
of Vps34. Another possibility is that Atg9 cycling involves the
UVRAG/Bif-1-containing Beclin 1 complex since Bif-1 transiently associates with Atg9 after starvation (Orsi et al., 2010).
VMP1, which interacts with Beclin 1, may function as a transmembrane protein that recruits Beclin 1 (and other components
of the Beclin 1 complex) to the phagophore (Figure 1C). It also
interacts with TP53INP2 (tumor protein 53-induced nuclear
protein 2), which like VMP1 is essential for autophagy and the
translocation of Beclin 1 and LC3 to autophagosomes (Yang
and Klionsky, 2010).
Conjugation Systems
Two ubiquitin-like conjugation systems are part of the vesicle
elongation process (Figure 1C). The first pathway involves
the covalent conjugation of Atg12 to Atg5, with the help of the
E1-like enzyme Atg7 and the E2-like enzyme Atg10. This conjugate is organized into a complex by associating with Atg16 in
a noncovalent fashion to form the multimeric Atg12-Atg5-Atg16
complex, which functions as the E3 ligase of LC3 (Yang and
Klionsky, 2010). The abundance of Atg5 may be regulated by
calcium-dependent activation of the cysteine protease, calpain,
which cleaves and inactivates Atg5, at least in cultured cells.
Thus, the reduction of cytosolic Ca2+ (or calpain inactivation)
may prevent Atg5 cleavage (Figure 1C), resulting in increased
cellular levels of full-length Atg5 and the proautophagic Atg12Atg5 conjugate (Xia et al., 2010).
The second pathway involves the conjugation of phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) to a glycine (Gly) residue of yeast Atg8/
mammalian LC3 by the sequential action of the protease Atg4,
the E1-like enzyme Atg7, and the E2-like enzyme Atg3 (Figure 1B). This lipid conjugation leads to the conversion of the
soluble form of LC3 (named LC3-I) to the autophagic vesicleassociated form, LC3-II (Yang and Klionsky, 2010). The lipidated
form of LC3 is stably associated with the autophagosome
membrane, and its biochemical and microscopic detection is
widely used to measure cellular autophagy (Mizushima et al.,
2010) (Figure 1C). In mammals, four Atg4 (Atg4A-D) and at least
six orthologs of Atg8 exist, among which LC3B (hereafter
referred to simply as LC3), GABARAP, and GATE16 have been
most studied (Weidberg et al., 2010).
Several stress signals regulate autophagy at the level of the
Atg8/LC3 conjugation system. For example, the death-associated protein kinase, DAPK, positively regulates autophagy by
associating with the LC3-interacting cytoskeleton molecule
MAP1B (Harrison et al., 2008) (in addition to phosphorylating
Beclin 1, discussed above [Zalckvar et al., 2009]). The cellular

FLICE-like inhibitor protein, c-FLIP, negatively regulates autophagy by preventing Atg3 from binding and activating LC3 (Lee
et al., 2009). Moreover, reactive oxygen species may regulate
the active cysteine site of Atg4 (Figure 1C) (Scherz-Shouval
et al., 2007). The enrichment of proteins with lipid kinase,
WD40, and GTPase regulatory domains in the mammalian
Atg8-interaction network (Behrends et al., 2010) may provide
additional clues as to how stress signals interface with autophagy control at the level of Atg8/LC3 regulation.
Several proteins that possess an LC3-interacting region (LIR)
and interact with LC3 (and its paralogs) serve as adaptors to
target defined structures such as ubiquitinated proteins or
mitochondria to the autophagic machinery (Figure 1D). The
best-characterized examples are p62 (also known as sequestosome1, SQSTM1) and NBR1 (Neighbor of BRCA1), which both
recognize ubiquitinated proteins (Kirkin et al., 2009) as well as
BNIP3L (also known as NIX), which binds to mitochondrial
membranes (Novak et al., 2010). The regulation of these autophagy adaptor proteins is not yet well understood but will likely be
key to understanding how specific stress stimuli trigger selective
autophagy.
Autophagy, Stress Stimuli, and Stress Signals
Autophagy is induced by a variety of stress stimuli, including
nutrient and energy stress, ER stress, pathogen-associated
molecular patterns (PAMPs) and danger-associated molecular
patterns (DAMPs), hypoxia, redox stress, and mitochondrial
damage. The stimulation of autophagy by these stimuli involves
diverse signals that have overlapping functions in autophagy and
the control of other cellular stress responses.
Autophagy Induced by Nutrient Stress
Nutrient depletion is the most potent known physiological
inducer of autophagy. In the majority of cultured mammalian
cells, nutrient depletion induces autophagy within minutes,
with maximal levels observed when cells are cultured in the
simultaneous absence of nutrients (such as amino acids and
glucose) and growth factors (such as those contained in serum)
(Boya et al., 2005). In mice, following starvation for 24–48 hr,
most cells in most tissues display increased numbers of autophagosomes (Mizushima, 2010). Several critical molecules
regulate starvation-induced autophagy (Figure 3A); of these,
mTOR and AMPK have been best characterized, and recent
studies also suggest a crucial role for sirtuins.
Sirtuins and Protein (De)Acetylation. Sirtuins are a family of
NAD-dependent deacetylases that sense environmental stress
(Haigis and Sinclair, 2010). The induction of autophagy by
starvation (but not by mTORC1 inhibition or ER stress) requires
Sirt1 (Lee et al., 2008; Morselli et al., 2010). Accordingly,
Sirt1À/À mice display a phenotype consistent with impaired
autophagy, including increased levels of the autophagy substrate p62, accumulation of damaged organelles, disruption of
energy homeostasis, and early perinatal lethality (Lee et al.,
2008). The transfection of cells with sirtuin 1 (Sirt1) with intact
deacetylase activity is sufficient to stimulate autophagy in
cultured mammalian cells (Lee et al., 2008). In this context, it is
intriguing that p300 acetyltransferase knockdown (Lee and Finkel, 2009), as well as histone acetylase inhibition by spermidine,
a natural polyamine, potently induces autophagy (Eisenberg
Molecular Cell 40, October 22, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc. 283

Molecular Cell

Review

Figure 3. Overview of the Major Signal Transduction Pathways that Regulate Autophagy in Response to Starvation
A summary of starvation-induced proautophagic signaling (A) is followed by a schematic overview of the signaling cascades involving sirtuin-1 and Foxo 3a (B),
AMPK (C), and mTORC1 (D).

et al., 2009), suggesting that protein acetylation may play
a general role in autophagy regulation.
Sirt1 can deacetylate Atg5, Atg7, and LC3 (Lee et al., 2008)
(Figure 3A), while p300 can acetylate Atg5, Atg7, LC3, and
Atg12 (Lee and Finkel, 2009). Furthermore, Sirt1 deacetylates
the transcription factor forkhead box O3a, FOXO3a, yet another
hub of autophagy regulation, leading to enhanced expression of
proautophagic Bnip3 (Kume et al., 2010). Akt inhibition resulting
from growth factor depletion also causes FOXO3 activation,
although via a different mechanism. Following its dephosphorylation, FOXO3 translocates into the nucleus (Figure 3A) and
upregulates multiple autophagy-related genes such as ULK2,
Beclin 1, VPS34, BNIP3 and BNIP3L, ATG12, ATG4B, LC3,
and GABARAPL1 (Mammucari et al., 2007). Another sirtuin,
Sirt2, dissociates from FOXO1 upon serum starvation, thus
causing the acetylation of FOXO1, favoring its interaction with
Atg7 in the cytoplasm and stimulating autophagy (Zhao et al.,
2010). Thus, protein (de)acetylation reactions influenced by
sirtuins and other enzymes may control autophagy at multiple
levels.
AMPK in Starvation, Energy Depletion, and Beyond. AMPK
acts as a central node that integrates several stress stimuli
284 Molecular Cell 40, October 22, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc.

with autophagy initiation (Figure 3C). AMPK monitors the
energy status of the cell by sensing its AMP:ATP ratio. Several
upstream kinases, including liver kinase B1 (LKB1, which is activated by energy depletion), calcium/calmodulin kinase kinaseb (CaMKKß, which is activated by cytosolic Ca2+), and TGFßactivated kinase-1 (TAK-1, which is also involved in IKK activation), can activate AMPK by phosphorylating a threonine residue
on its catalytic a subunit (Ruderman et al., 2010). In addition,
Sirt1 and AMPK engage in a coordinated positive amplification
loop (the ‘‘Sirt1/AMPK cycle’’) (Ruderman et al., 2010) that acts
to initiate autophagy in nutrient deprivation conditions. Sirt1mediated deacetylation of LKB1 increases its serine-threonine
kinase activity and stimulates its translocation from the nucleus
to the cytoplasm where it activates AMPK. AMPK can also indirectly stimulate Sirt1 activation by the reduction of nicotinamide
(NAM) and an increase in NAD+ that may be catalyzed by NAM
phosphoribosyltransferase upregulation, thus completing the
feed-forward circuitry (Lan et al., 2008; Ruderman et al., 2010).
The best-studied mechanism by which AMPK induces
autophagy is through mTORC1 inhibition (see below), via phosphorylation of the tuberous sclerosis complex 2 (TSC2) and the
regulatory associated protein of mTOR, Raptor (Figure 3D).

Molecular Cell

Review
The recent identification of an interaction between AMPK and
ULK1 (Behrends et al., 2010) raises the speculative possibility
that AMPK may also act more directly on core components of
the autophagy machinery to initiate autophagy.
mTORC1 Inhibition in Starvation-Induced Autophagy. Besides
inhibition by AMPK, mTORC1 is also inhibited upon withdrawal
of growth factors such as insulin or insulin-like growth factor (Figures 3C and 3D). In response to growth factors, Akt
becomes catalytically active (due to the sequential stimulation
of growth factor-activated class I PI3K and PI3K-dependent
protein kinase 1, PDK1, which phosphorylates Akt). Moreover,
growth factors activate Ras, which stimulates a cascade
involving Raf-1, MEK1/2, and ERK1/2. Both Akt and ERK1/2
can phosphorylate one of two subunits of the tuberous sclerosis
complex 1/2 (TSC1/TSC2), and Akt can phosphorylate Raptor,
thus causing the activation of mTOR (Figure 3D) (Neufeld, 2010).
Moreover, amino acids activate mTORC1 independently of the
Akt-TSC1/TSC2 axis, through the Rag family of GTPases, which
directly interact with Raptor and recruit mTORC1 to the lysosomal surface (Efeyan and Sabatini, 2010) (Figure 3D). Thus,
mTOR is inhibited through multiple mechanisms during starvation conditions (Sengupta et al., 2010).
Additional Kinases Involved in Starvation-Induced Autophagy.
Several kinases besides AMPK function in starvation-induced
upregulation of autophagy. This includes JNK1, which both
phosphorylates Bcl-2, reducing its affinity for the BH3 domain
of Beclin 1 (Wei et al., 2008), and phosphorylates Sirt1, promoting its enzymatic activity (Nasrin et al., 2009) (Figure 3A).
Moreover, as noted below, the phosphorylation of eIF2a (Kouroku et al., 2007; Talloczy et al., 2002) and the activation of IKK
(Criollo et al., 2010) are essential for starvation-induced autophagy. Other kinases such as p38a mitogen-activated protein
kinase (p38a MAPK, also known as MAPK14) potently inhibit
starvation-induced autophagy. p38a MAPK acts on p38IP,
which is required for starvation-induced mAtg9 trafficking and
autophagosome formation (Webber and Tooze, 2010). Thus,
the coordinated activation (and inhibition) of several kinases is
essential for the induction of autophagy by nutrient depletion.
The precise details of such coordination, however, remain poorly
understood.
ER Stress and Autophagy
The ER is not only involved in protein synthesis and maturation
(including correct folding) but may also constitute a major
source/scaffold of the autophagic isolation membrane (Hayashi-Nishino et al., 2009; Yla-Anttila et al., 2009). The unfolded
protein response (UPR), the major ER stress pathway (Buchberger et al., 2010), is a potent stimulus of autophagy. The three
canonical branches of the UPR are mediated by three ER
membrane-associated proteins, PERK (PKR-like eIF2a kinase,
also known as EIF2AK3), ATF6 (activating transcription factor-6),
and IRE1 (inositol requiring enzyme 1) (Figure 4A), all of which are
normally bound to and inactivated by the chaperone BiP/GRP78.
The occupancy of BiP/GRP78 by misfolded proteins releases
PERK, IRE1, and ATF6 from their inhibition. Among these,
PERK and ATF6 act as autophagy inducers, while IRE1 acts
a negative regulator of autophagy.
PERK and eIF2a Phosphorylation. PERK mediates the transcriptional activation of the proteins LC3 and Atg5 in hypoxic

responses through the action of the transcription factors ATF4
and CHOP, respectively (Rouschop et al., 2010). PERK may
also reduce the translation of IkBa (Deng et al., 2004), thereby
activating NF-kB, which also could contribute to autophagy
(Figure 4B). PERK phosphorylates the eukaryotic initiation factor
2a (eIF2a) on residue serine 51, which then initiates a cascade of
events that decreases the overload of misfolded proteins,
thereby alleviating ER stress (Harding et al., 2003). eIF2a phosphorylation initiates both a general inhibition of protein translation
as well as the selective translation of some stress-responsive
transcripts including that of the ATF4 transcription factor and
certain autophagy genes (Hotamisligil, 2010).
Cells that carry a nonphosphorylatable mutant of eIF2a (S51A)
fail to induce autophagy in response to starvation, suggesting
that eIF2a phosphorylation on serine 51 (and by extension
eIF2a kinases) plays a major role in autophagy regulation (Kouroku et al., 2007; Talloczy et al., 2002). This phosphorylation event
integrates various types of environmental and endogenous
stress signals beyond ER stress, such as amino acid deprivation,
exposure to double-stranded viral RNA, osmotic stress, UV light
exposure, heme deficiency, hypoxia, and oxidative stress
(Harding et al., 2003). These divergent signals activate four
different eIF2a kinases including PERK (which is activated by
ER stress, radiation, or hypoxia), general control nonderepressible-2 (GCN2, which is activated by uncharged tRNAs in amino
acid-starved cells), heme-regulated inhibitor (HRI, which is activated by heme deficiency in erythroid precursor cells), and PKR
(which is activated by double-stranded RNA and in some
contexts, ER stress [Nakamura et al., 2010]) (Figure 4B). Yeast
GCN2 and mammalian PKR and PERK have been shown to be
required for autophagy induced by starvation, viral infection,
and ER stress, respectively (He and Klionsky, 2009). These findings illustrate the importance of eIF2a kinases in autophagy
control, not only in the UPR but also in other conditions of stress.
How eIF2a phosphorylation contributes to autophagy initiation
is not known. One highly speculative possibility is that eIF2a
phosphorylation might somehow affect the ER in a manner that
promotes the physical formation of the isolation membrane.
Another possibility is that eIF2a phosphorylation stimulates
autophagy via its effects on the transactivation of autophagy
genes. eIF2a phosphorylation stimulates the selective translation of the ATF4 transcription factor (although general translation
is shut off), which stimulates LC3 expression (which is necessary
for sustained autophagy) (Milani et al., 2009) (Figure 4B). Moreover, there are direct interactions between eIF2a subunits and
core autophagy proteins, although it is not yet known whether
these interactions are biologically significant (Behrends et al.,
2010).
IRE1. IRE1 is a serine/threonine kinase (which activates JNK1)
and also an endoribonuclease, which catalyzes the splicing of the
mRNA-encoding form of the transcription factor XBP1, which
then transactivates UPR genes involved in ERAD, protein folding,
and protein quality control (Hetz and Glimcher, 2009; Hotamisligil, 2010). Perhaps unexpectedly, the inhibition of IRE1 and
its downstream effector XBP1 enhances autophagy induction.
Mice lacking XBP1 in neurons exhibit increased levels of baseline autophagy, which leads to increased turnover of an autophagic substrate, mutant superoxide dismutase-1 (SOD1), and
Molecular Cell 40, October 22, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc. 285

Molecular Cell

Review

Figure 4. Summary of Signal Transduction Pathways that Connect Autophagy and Selected Stress Signals
Depicted are the connections between autophagy and ER stress (A), eIF2± phosphorylation (B), and IKK activation (C). For details, see text.

protection against mutant SOD1-induced amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (Hetz et al., 2009). Since the predominant outcome of
ER stress is the induction (rather than inhibition) of autophagy,
it is possible that IRE1/XBP1-dependent signals have the function to dampen excessive autophagy triggered via the PERK/
eIF2a pathway (Figure 4A).
Immune Signals
Infection (or exposure of cells to microbial products) constitutes
a specialized form of cellular stress that, in many cases, results
in autophagy induction (Sumpter and Levine, 2010). Autophagy
induction during infection is regulated by cytokines such as
IFNg (and downstream immunity-related GTPases) as well
as pathogen recognition receptors (PRRs) that recognize conserved components of pathogens or products of their replication
(PAMPs). The PRRs include families of TLRs that recognize
PAMPS to activate proinflammatory cytokines and type I interferon production via NF-kB-, MAPK-, and interferon-regulatory
pathways; NOD-like receptors (NLRs) that primarily activate
signaling via NF-kB and MAPK and components of the inflammasome; RIG-I like receptors (RLRs) that recognize cytoplasmic
viral RNA and dA:dT rich dsDNA; C-type lectins; and the
double-stranded RNA-binding protein kinase PKR (Sumpter
and Levine, 2010). Since these PRRs recognize not only PAMPS
but also DAMPs (which include products of necrotic cells,
hypoxia, abnormal intracellular ion gradients, reactive oxygen
species, and accumulation of misfolded proteins), this family of
‘‘immune signals’’ that regulates autophagy may represent
a more generalized system that cells use to elicit autophagy in
response to different forms of stress.
286 Molecular Cell 40, October 22, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc.

TAK1, IKK, and NF-kB. The transcription factor NF-kB and
some of its upstream regulators function to integrate diverse
stress signals including immune signals with the autophagy
pathway. NF-kB is activated when the inhibitor of NF-kB (IkB)
is phosphorylated by the IkB kinase (IKK), a kinase that is
composed of one regulatory subunit (IKKg, also known as
NEMO) and two catalytic subunits (IKKa, IKKb). The IKK complex
is activated in response to multiple different stressors such as
reactive oxygen species, DNA damage, and ligation of death
receptors and PRRs. Frequently, this IKK activation is mediated
by another upstream kinase, TAK1 (Figure 4C) (Baud and Karin,
2009). In murine and human cells, knockout and/or knockdown
of Tak1 or any of the Ikk subunits (but not that of the Nf-kb
subunit p65) prevents the induction of autophagy in response
to diverse stimuli including starvation, rapamycin, p53 inhibition,
or ER stress (Criollo et al., 2010; Herrero-Martin et al., 2009).
Conversely, expression of constitutively active IKK subunits
stimulates autophagy through an NF-kB-independent pathway
that relies on the activation of AMPK and JNK1 (Criollo et al.,
2010). However, the NF-kB family member p65/RelA can upregulate beclin 1 expression and autophagy during T cell activation (Copetti et al., 2009), and NF-kB-incompetent cells are deficient in heat shock-induced autophagy (Nivon et al., 2009).
Thus, there may be both IKK-dependent and NF-kB-independent as well as NF-kB-dependent mechanisms for autophagy
induction. In addition, the p105 subunit of NF-kB can interact
with certain autophagy proteins, including Beclin 1 (Behrends
et al., 2010), but the significance of these interactions has yet
to be explored.

Molecular Cell

Review
Aside from the regulation of autophagy by NF-kB, autophagy
may, in turn, regulate NF-kB signaling. For example, NF-kB
signaling may be negatively regulated by targeting IKK and the
NF-kB inducing kinase, NIK, for autophagic degradation (Qing
et al., 2007). Furthermore, when autophagy is inhibited, p62
accumulates and alters the NF-kB signaling pathway (Mathew
et al., 2009).
PKR and the ‘‘Meta-Inflammasome’’. An interesting recent
study uncovers a potential relationship between an autophagyregulatory eIF2a kinase, PKR, previously believed to respond
primarily to virus infection (Talloczy et al., 2002, 2006), and
the coordinate regulation of JNK1 and insulin signaling with
ER stress and fatty acid exposure. PKR was found to respond
to ER stress and fatty acid exposure, and to be required for
the JNK1 phosphorylation, serine phosphorylation of the insulin
receptor substrate 1 (IRS1), and consequent insulin resistance
that occurs in response to these stimuli (Nakamura et al., 2010).
Based on these findings and a previous report that PKR
activates the IKKb-NF-kB pathway (Bonnet et al., 2000), Hotamisligil et al. (Hotamisligil, 2010) proposed the existence of a
‘‘meta-inflammasome’’ composed of PKR, eIF2a, JNK, IRS,
IKK, and other components that link ER stress to more global
stress responses, including inflammatory signaling and metabolic dysfunction. In the postulated ‘‘meta-inflammasome,’’
PKR phosphorylates eIF2a (which induces autophagy), activates the ‘‘inflammatory kinases’’ IKKb and JNK1 (which both
induce autophagy), and phosphorylates (and inhibits) IRS1
(which also would induce autophagy) (Nakamura et al., 2010).
Thus, this hypothetical molecular platform might explain the
functional overlap and crosstalk between the JNK1, IKK, and
eIF2a pathways in the induction of autophagy.
It is, however, unclear whether this autophagy-promoting
activity, rather than other downstream effects of the signaling
molecules, would explain the proinflammatory and adverse
metabolic effects of the ‘‘meta-inflammasome,’’ since genetic
deletions of autophagy genes generally activates inflammatory
signaling (Sumpter and Levine, 2010; Virgin and Levine, 2009)
and a recent study found that hepatic suppression of the Atg7
autophagy gene results in increased ER stress and insulin resistance (Yang et al., 2010). Perhaps the activation of autophagy
by the meta-inflammasome serves as a negative feedback
mechanism to limit ER stress; this hypothesis would reconcile
the speculated role of the meta-inflammasome in autophagy
activation with the cytoprotective roles of autophagy.
Hypoxia and Anoxia
Hypoxia and anoxia (with oxygen concentrations <3% and
<0.1%, respectively) both cause autophagy through a variety
of different mechanisms. Hypoxia-induced autophagy depends
on hypoxia-inducible factor, HIF, while anoxia-induced autophagy is HIF independent (Majmundar et al., 2010; Mazure and
Pouyssegur, 2010). HIF is a heterodimer of a constitutive
b subunit and an oxygen-regulated a subunit that only becomes
stabilized (and hence expressed) when oxygen concentration
declines below a threshold of $5%. Upon moderate hypoxia
(1%–3% oxygen), HIF activates the transcription of BNIP3 and
BNIP3L (NIX), two BH3-only proteins that can disrupt the inhibitory interaction between Beclin 1 and Bcl-2 (Bellot et al., 2009)
(Figure 5A). Moreover, BNIP3L, which often is present at the

outer surface of mitochondria, possesses a WXXL motif that
binds to LC3 and its homolog GABARAP (Novak et al., 2010),
thereby targeting mitochondria for autophagic destruction. The
transcription of BNIP3 is also upregulated by the transcription
factor FOXO3, provided that it is deacetylated by Sirt1 (Kume
et al., 2010).
Additional pathways have been implicated in hypoxia-induced
autophagy, especially in cases of severe hypoxia or anoxia
(Figure 5A). These include the protein DJ-1 (also called CAP1/
RS/PARK7, which regulates autophagy by an unknown mechanism), the autocrine stimulation of a PDGFR-dependent
pathway, the stimulation of AMPK through metabolic stress,
and the UPR of the ER (Mazure and Pouyssegur, 2010). Maximal
induction of autophagy by hypoxia also requires PERK-mediated
phosphorylation of eIF2a (Rouschop et al., 2010), further underscoring the importance of eIF2a phosphorylation as a general
autophagy regulator. Hypoxia increases the transcription of the
essential autophagy genes LC3 and Atg5 through the transcription factors ATF4 and CHOP, respectively, which are both regulated by PERK (Rouschop et al., 2010).
Redox Stress and p53
Oxidative stress induces autophagy through multiple mechanisms (Figure 5B). Exogenous hydrogen peroxide reportedly
can activate PERK (and thereby stimulate eIF2a phosphorylation)
(Liu et al., 2008), directly oxidize and activate Atg4 proteases (and
thereby accelerate the production of proteolytically mature LC3)
(Scherz-Shouval et al., 2007), and inhibit mTOR either directly
(Liu et al., 2008) or indirectly, via activation of PARP1 (as a result
of DNA damage) and/or via activation of a cytoplasmic pool of
ATM and the subsequent activation of LKB1 and AMPK1 (Alexander et al., 2010; Huang et al., 2009). The cellular response to
an increase in ROS often involves the activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), including JNK1, which can
activate autophagy (Wong et al., 2010). Finally, DNA damage
also stimulates the expression of proautophagic p53-induced
target genes.
The tumor suppressor protein p53, which can be activated by
different types of stress including redox stresss, has a dual
effect on autophagy (Figure 5C), acting as a positive regulator
of autophagy via its transcriptional activity and as a negative
regulator of autophagy via its cytoplasmic functions (Green
and Kroemer, 2009). As a transcription factor, p53 transactivates several autophagy inducers including DRAM1 (which
may operate through JNK1 activation) and Sestrin2 (which binds
to the ternary complex TSC1/TSC2-AMPK, inducing phosphorylation and activation of TSC2 by AMPK). One of the few
p53-induced genes that inhibits autophagy is TIGAR, a fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase that stimulates the pentose phosphate shunt and helps to lower intracellular ROS (Bensaad
et al., 2009). When present in the cytoplasm, p53 acts as a tonic
inhibitor of autophagy. In several contexts of autophagy induction, p53 must be depleted from the cytoplasm for optimal
autophagy induction to ensue. This may involve the activation
of the p53-specific ubiquitin ligase, HDM2, which targets
p53 to proteasome-mediated destruction (Green and Kroemer,
2009). However, it is not yet fully clear how cytoplasmic p53
inhibits autophagy. The only essential autophagy protein that
is known to interact with p53 is FIP200, which is a multifunctional
Molecular Cell 40, October 22, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc. 287

Molecular Cell

Review

Figure 5. Overview of Selected Stress Pathways that Induce Autophagy
The mechanisms involved in autophagy induction by hypoxia or anoxia (A), increased oxidative damage (reactive oxygen species, ROS) (B), perturbation of the
p53 system (C), or mitochondrial dysfunction (D) are represented schematically.

protein that is present in the ULK1 complex, yet also binds to
Pyk2, FAK, TSC2, ASK1, and TRAF2 and plays a role in the
control of cell adhesion, migration, proliferation, and cell death
(Gan and Guan, 2008). Thus, an interesting question is whether
p53 somehow negatively regulates the ULK1 complex through
its interaction with FIP200.
Mitochondrial Damage
Cells must remove damaged mitochondria to prevent the accumulation of ROS. This process of mitochondrial quality control is
mediated by mitophagy, the selective autophagic removal of
mitochondria. Considerable advances have been made in
understanding the mechanisms by which damaged mitochondria are targeted for autophagy, as well as the functional significance of mitochondrial quality control in preventing aging,
neurodegenerative diseases, and other pathologies.
In response to potentially lethal stress or damage, mitochondrial membranes can be permeabilized through multiple distinct
biochemical routes. Indeed, mitochondrial membrane permeabilization (MMP) constitutes one of the hallmarks of imminent
apoptotic or necrotic cell death (Kroemer et al., 2007). However,
if only a fraction of mitochondria are permeabilized, autophagic
removal of the damaged mitochondria can rescue the cell. The
autophagic recognition of depolarized mitochondria is mediated
by a refined voltage sensor, involving the mitochondrial kinase,
PINK1. Under normal circumstances, PINK1 is continuously
288 Molecular Cell 40, October 22, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc.

recruited to the mitochondrial outer membrane but subject to
voltage-dependent proteolysis, which leads to its removal from
mitochondria and to proteasome-mediated degradation (Narendra et al., 2010). Upon mitochondrial depolarization, PINK1
rapidly accumulates on the mitochondrial surface, facilitates
the recruitment of the E3 ubiquitin ligase Parkin (Narendra
et al., 2010), which ubiquitinates mitochondrial substrates
including the outer membrane protein VDAC1, recruits the autophagy adaptor molecule, p62/SQSTM1, and thereby targets
mitochondria for autophagic removal (Geisler et al., 2010)
(Figure 5D). Both PINK1 and Parkin genes were originally identified because loss-of-function mutations affecting either of them
cause familial Parkinson’s disease in humans. Disease-causing
mutations in PINK1 and Parkin disrupt Parkin recruitment and
Parkin-induced mitophagy (Geisler et al., 2010; Narendra et al.,
2010). At least in some cell types (MEFs), depolarization-induced
mitophagy involves BNIP3L (also known as NIX) (Novak et al.,
2010) (Figure 5D), and in mice, BNIP3L/Nix is required for the
removal of mitochondria during erythroid maturation (Sandoval
et al., 2008). At present, the functional relationship between
NIX-dependent mitophagy and the PINK1/Parkin mitophagy
pathway has not been elucidated.
Interestingly, the maturation of autophagosomes during mitophagy may be controlled differently than during starvationinduced autophagy. The ubiquitin-binding deacetylase, histone

Molecular Cell

Review
deacetylase-6 (HDAC6), promotes autophagosomal maturation
by recruiting a cortactin-dependent, actin-remodeling machinery
to ubiquitinated structures, where assembly of the F-actin network facilitates autophagosome-lysosome fusion. (Lee et al.,
2010). However, HDAC6 deficiency leads to a failure of autophagosomal maturation only in the context of quality control autophagy (mitophagy and protein aggregate removal), but not in
starvation-induced autophagy (Lee et al., 2010). This specific
requirement for a ubiquitin-binding deacetylase in quality control
autophagy suggests that ubiquitin modification may be a key
signal underlying distinct steps in selective autophagy.
Autophagy Regulatory Pathways in the General Stress
Response
In the preceding section, we reviewed specific stress stimuli and
stress signals that regulate autophagy. Certain general concepts
regarding the interrelationship between autophagy regulatory
pathways and the general stress response are beginning to
emerge.
Integration of Autophagy and Other Cellular Stress
Responses
The integration of autophagy and other cellular stress
responses can be conceptualized in the framework of three
broad concepts. First, a single type of stress stimulus elicits a
variety of signals that trigger distinct cellular responses (one
of which is autophagy) that cooperate for the sake of optimal
cellular repair and adaptation. Second, distinct stress responses are often integrated through the ability of a single
molecular event to stimulate multiple adaptive pathways (one
of which is autophagy). Third, distinct cellular stress response
pathways, including autophagy, mutually control other stress
response pathways.
Some representative examples of the first concept (Figure 6A)
include (1) redox stress, which induces transcriptional reprogramming through HIF, NF-kB, and p53 activation; elicits the
UPR; and stimulates both general and selective autophagy; (2)
hypoxia, which induces adaptive responses including the transcriptional activation of angiogenic and cytoprotective cytokines
in parallel with autophagy stimulation; and (3) DNA damage,
which elicits nuclear p53 translocation, cell-cycle checkpoint
activation, cell-cycle arrest, and autophagy.
Many of the signals discussed in preceding sections illustrate
the second concept. For example, eIF2a phosphorylation participates in the UPR in stress granule formation, in general translational control, and in autophagy induction (Kimball et al., 2003;
Talloczy et al., 2002). Similarly, activation of TAK1 and IKK
coordinates the activation of NF-kB signaling and that of autophagy (Criollo et al., 2010; Herrero-Martin et al., 2009). Activation
of LKB1-AMPK stimulates autophagy, as well as the phosphorylation and activation of p27kip1, a cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor that leads to cell-cycle arrest (Liang et al., 2007).
mTOR inhibition results in autophagy induction, as well as in
the inhibition of anabolic reactions including IRES-independent
mRNA translation. FOXO3 activation induces the transcription
of genes whose products increase both proteasomal and autophagic degradation (Mammucari et al., 2007).
The control of other stress pathways by autophagy was discussed briefly in previous sections. For example, as noted

above, deficient autophagy leads to p62 accumulation, which
alters NF-kB signaling (Mathew et al., 2009). In addition, p62
accumulation in the setting of deficient autophagy activates
the stress responsive transcription factor Nrf2 (Komatsu
et al., 2010). High levels of p62 disrupt the interaction between
the Cul3/Rbx1 ubiquitin ligase complex, Keap1 (which normally
targets Nrf2 for proteasomal degradation), and Nrf2, resulting
in enhanced Nrf2 activity and an increase in expression of
Nrf2-regulated stress response enzymes (Komatsu et al., 2010)
(Figure 6B). In addition, several different autophagy genes regulate different aspects of inflammatory signaling, although, in
some instances, it is not known whether such regulation is
a consequence of autophagy or alternative functions of the
autophagy genes (Sumpter and Levine, 2010; Virgin and Levine, 2009). Autophagy genes negatively regulate RLR-mediated
induction of type I interferon both via conjugation of Atg12Atg5 to CARD domains of RLR signaling molecules and
through elimination of dysfunctional mitochondria. Atg16L1
and Atg7 negatively regulate inflammatory signaling, including
IL-1b and IL-18 secretion. Moreover, Atg9, but not Atg7, negatively regulates activation of STING, a recently discovered
transmembrane protein that is required for efficient activation
of type I IFN and proinflammatory cytokine production in
response to interferon stimulatory DNA (Saitoh et al., 2009).
These examples underscore the mutual control that exists
between autophagy and inflammatory signaling pathways.
Another important axis of mutual control of different stress
responses pathways is between autophagy and cell-cycle regulation. Autophagy is blocked during G2 phase and mitosis, and
a recent study indicates that this may be mediated by cyclindependent kinase-mediated phosphorylation of Vps34, which
negatively regulates its interaction with Beclin 1 during mitosis
(Furuya et al., 2010). Moreover, there is a strong correlation
between mitogenic signaling and autophagy inhibition (Levine
and Kroemer, 2008). This correlation is further strengthened
by a recent genome-wide screen, which found that a large
percentage of genes that negatively regulate autophagy are
positively involved in cell growth and proliferation (Lipinski
et al., 2010). We speculate that this mutually exclusive regulation
of autophagy and cell growth may constitute a fundamental
mechanism that cells use to appropriately adapt their metabolism to stressful environmental conditions.
Links among General Autophagy and Quality Control
Mechanisms
There is a growing consensus that autophagy is stimulated either
in response to a central ‘‘command’’ of the cell (for example, in
response to nutrient depletion), in which case it is nonselective
and general, or as a result of ubiquitination reactions that specifically target ‘‘garbage,’’ i.e., protein aggregates or damaged
mitochondria or intracellular pathogens, for autophagic degradation. Nonetheless, these two types—general versus selective—of
autophagy may not be completely separable from each other.
Indeed, stimulation of the general autophagic pathway, either
by inhibiting mTOR or by stimulating mTOR-independent
autophagy pathways, leads to reduced accumulation of mutated,
aggregation-prone proteins (such as mutant a-synyclein or huntingtin protein) and damaged mitochondria (Sarkar et al., 2007;
Williams et al., 2008). Similarly, starvation or mTOR inhibition
Molecular Cell 40, October 22, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc. 289

Molecular Cell

Review

Figure 6. Hypothetical Models of Key Cellular Stress Response Networks
(A) Particular stress stimuli (e.g., oxidative damage, hypoxia or anoxia, nutrient starvation, ER stress) can elicit different responses that cooperate to achieve
optimal cellular repair and adaptation. A diverse range of stressors activate interconnected cytoprotective mechanisms able to modulate autophagy at different
levels, such as transcriptional reprogramming, protein modifications (phosphorylation, acetylation, etc.), or cell-cycle modulation.
(B) Autophagy inhibition and stress. Autophagy impairment leads to the accumulation of damaged proteins and organelles, which in turn can elicit cellular stress.
Moreover, disabled autophagy can increase the abundance of p62, resulting in an enhanced activity of NF-kB, which leads to enhanced inflammation. By
contrast, p62 accumulation leads to the activation of Nrf2 transcription factor and in a consequent increase in the expression of stress response enzymes.
(C) Mutual exclusion between autophagy and apoptosis. Autophagy, as a cytoprotective pathway, eliminates potential sources of proapoptotic stimuli such as
damaged mitochondria, thereby setting a higher threshold against apoptosis induction. By contrast, the apoptosis-associated activation of proteases such as
calpain and caspase-3 may destroy autophagy-specific factors (Atg4D, Beclin 1, or Atg5), thereby suppressing autophagy.

leads to increased autophagic targeting of intracellular bacteria
(Gutierrez et al., 2004). One possible interpretation of these findings is that a general increase in protein and organelle turnover
may be sufficient to avoid protein aggregation and organellar
degeneration. Another attractive interpretation is that general autophagy is not completely nonselective and may preferentially
degrade proteins and structures that are on the ‘‘verge’’ of aggregation or damage. This yet-unproven concept predicts that an
increase in general autophagy would reset the threshold of
quality control so that organelles that exhibit only minor alterations (and that normally would not be removed by autophagy)
are subject to autophagic turnover. This would explain why an
increase in general autophagy can accelerate bacterial clearance, delay the development of multiple neurodegenerative
diseases, and mediate a general antiaging effect (Madeo et al.,
2010).
Mutual Exclusion between Autophagy and Apoptosis
Autophagy is usually a self-limited process that protects cells
from cell death by multiple mechanisms that include, but are
not limited to, maintainance of bioenergetic homeostasis, recycling of misfolded and aggregate-prone proteins, and removal
of uncoupled or permeabilized mitochondria. The intrinsic
pathway of apoptosis is initiated by MMP (Kroemer et al.,
290 Molecular Cell 40, October 22, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc.

2007). If MMP is limited to a fraction of mitochondria, this will
result in the selective autophagic removal of depolarized mitochondria and the avoidance of cell death. Thus, the efficacy of
autophagy may set a higher threshold for the ability of MMP to
constitute an irreparable, lethal event. In addition, it is plausible
that the liberation of Bcl-2 and FLIP from activated autophagy
protein complexes may free up these molecules to block the
intrinsic and extrinsic pathways of apoptosis, respectively (Lee
et al., 2009; Pattingre et al., 2005).
Given the predominantly cytoprotective role of autophagy, it
seems (teleo)logical that induction of apoptosis would be coupled
to the inactivation of autophagy (Figure 6C). There are some
examples of molecular events that support this concept. Caspase-3 cleaves Beclin 1, thereby destroying its proautophagic
activity. The C-terminal fragment of Beclin 1 that results from
this cleavage acquires a new function and can amplify mitochondrion-mediated apoptosis (Wirawan et al., 2010). Caspase-3 activation also cleaves and activates Atg4D, an enzyme that catalyzes the delipidation of the LC3 paralog GABARPL1. This
proteolytic activation increases Atg4D targeting to mitochondria
via a putative BH3 domain and enhances its cytotoxic activity
(Betin and Lane, 2009). Similarly, the proteolytic activity of
calpain can destroy the proautophagic function of Atg5 (Xia

Molecular Cell

Review
et al., 2010) while it generates an Atg5-derived proapoptotic mitochondrion-permeabilizing fragment of Atg5 (Yousefi et al., 2006).
All these results underscore that concept that autophagy and
apoptosis are antagonistic events that tend to inhibit each other.
Concluding Remarks
In this review, we have described stimulus-dependent as well as
common regulatory and execution steps of autophagy, with
a focus on the close links that exist between autophagy and
different types of adaptive and repair responses to stress. These
links consist of multiple and intricate mechanisms that are intertwined in complex intersecting pathways, which often function in
positive and negative amplification loops, thus composing
molecular switches and homeostatic devices. A more detailed
molecular comprehension of these regulatory networks, as well
as their biomathematical integration using systems biology
approaches, may furnish testable models for more refined
experimental and therapeutic manipulations of autophagy. At
present, the comprehension of autophagic regulation has only
just begun, and its multiple links to cell growth, proliferation,
senescence, and apoptosis await further exploration. We expect
that additional major circuits of autophagy regulation will emerge
and perhaps supersede in importance the pathways that we
currently know—or believe to know.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
G.K. is supported by the Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer (Equipes labellise´e),
Agence Nationale pour la Recherche (ANR), European Commission (Apo-Sys,
ChemoRes), Fondation pour la Recherche Me´dicale (FRM), Institut National du
Cancer (INCa), and Cance´ropoˆle Ile-de-France and AXA Chair for Longevity
Research. G.M. is supported by EMBO. B.L. is supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIH), National Cancer Institute (NCI)/National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI).

REFERENCES
Alexander, A., Cai, S.L., Kim, J., Nanez, A., Sahin, M., MacLean, K.H., Inoki, K.,
Guan, K.L., Shen, J., Person, M.D., et al. (2010). ATM signals to TSC2 in the
cytoplasm to regulate mTORC1 in response to ROS. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 107, 4153–4158.
Axe, E.L., Walker, S.A., Manifava, M., Chandra, P., Roderick, H.L.,
Habermann, A., Griffiths, G., and Ktistakis, N.T. (2008). Autophagosome
formation from membrane compartments enriched in phosphatidylinositol 3phosphate and dynamically connected to the endoplasmic reticulum. J. Cell
Biol. 182, 685–701.
Baud, V., and Karin, M. (2009). Is NF-kappaB a good target for cancer therapy?
Hopes and pitfalls. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 8, 33–40.

Bonnet, M.C., Weil, R., Dam, E., Hovanessian, A.G., and Meurs, E.F. (2000).
PKR stimulates NF-kappaB irrespective of its kinase function by interacting
with the IkappaB kinase complex. Mol. Cell. Biol. 20, 4532–4542.
Boya, P., Gonzalez-Polo, R.A., Casares, N., Perfettini, J.L., Dessen, P.,
Larochette, N., Metivier, D., Meley, D., Souquere, S., Yoshimori, T., et al.
(2005). Inhibition of macroautophagy triggers apoptosis. Mol. Cell. Biol. 25,
1025–1040.
Buchberger, A., Bukau, B., and Sommer, T. (2010). Protein quality control in
the cytosol and the endoplasmic reticulum: brothers in arms. Mol. Cell 40,
this issue, 238–252.
Copetti, T., Bertoli, C., Dalla, E., Demarchi, F., and Schneider, C. (2009). p65/
RelA modulates BECN1 transcription and autophagy. Mol. Cell. Biol. 29,
2594–2608.
Criollo, A., Senovilla, L., Authier, H., Maiuri, M.C., Morselli, E., Vitale, I., Kepp,
O., Tasdemir, E., Galluzzi, L., Shen, S., et al. (2010). The IKK complex contributes to the induction of autophagy. EMBO J. 29, 619–631.
Deng, J., Lu, P.D., Zhang, Y., Scheuner, D., Kaufman, R.J., Sonenberg, N.,
Harding, H.P., and Ron, D. (2004). Translational repression mediates activation
of nuclear factor kappa B by phosphorylated translation initiation factor 2. Mol.
Cell. Biol. 24, 10161–10168.
Di Bartolomeo, S., Corazzari, M., Nazio, F., Oliverio, S., Lisi, G., Antonioli, M.,
Pagliarini, V., Matteoni, S., Fuoco, C., Giunta, L., et al. (2010). The dynamic
interaction of Ambra1 with the dynein motor complex regulates mammalian
autophagy. J. Cell Biol. 191, 155–168.
Efeyan, A., and Sabatini, D.M. (2010). mTOR and cancer: many loops in one
pathway. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 22, 169–176.
Eisenberg, T., Knauer, H., Schauer, A., Buttner, S., Ruckenstuhl, C., CarmonaGutierrez, D., Ring, J., Schroeder, S., Magnes, C., Antonacci, L., et al. (2009).
Induction of autophagy by spermidine promotes longevity. Nat. Cell Biol. 11,
1305–1314.
Furuya, T., Kim, M., Lipinski, M., Li, J., Kim, D., Lu, T., Shen, Y., Rameh, L.,
Yankner, B., Tsai, L.H., et al. (2010). Negative regulation of Vps34 by Cdk
mediated phosphorylation. Mol. Cell 38, 500–511.
Gan, B., and Guan, J.L. (2008). FIP200, a key signaling node to coordinately
regulate various cellular processes. Cell. Signal. 20, 787–794.
Geisler, S., Holmstrom, K.M., Skujat, D., Fiesel, F.C., Rothfuss, O.C., Kahle,
P.J., and Springer, W. (2010). PINK1/Parkin-mediated mitophagy is dependent on VDAC1 and p62/SQSTM1. Nat. Cell Biol. 12, 119–131.
Green, D.R., and Kroemer, G. (2009). Cytoplasmic functions of the tumour
suppressor p53. Nature 458, 1127–1130.
Gutierrez, M.G., Master, S.S., Singh, S.B., Taylor, G.A., Colombo, M.I., and
Deretic, V. (2004). Autophagy is a defense mechanism inhibiting BCG and
Mycobacterium tuberculosis survival in infected macrophages. Cell 119,
753–766.
Haigis, M.C., and Sinclair, D.A. (2010). Mammalian sirtuins: biological insights
and disease relevance. Annu. Rev. Pathol. 5, 253–295.
Hailey, D.W., Rambold, A.S., Satpute-Krishnan, P., Mitra, K., Sougrat, R., Kim,
P.K., and Lippincott-Schwartz, J. (2010). Mitochondria supply membranes for
autophagosome biogenesis during starvation. Cell 141, 656–667.

Behrends, C., Sowa, M.E., Gygi, S.P., and Harper, J.W. (2010). Network organization of the human autophagy system. Nature 466, 68–76.

Harding, H.P., Zhang, Y., Zeng, H., Novoa, I., Lu, P.D., Calfon, M., Sadri, N.,
Yun, C., Popko, B., Paules, R., et al. (2003). An integrated stress response
regulates amino acid metabolism and resistance to oxidative stress. Mol.
Cell 11, 619–633.

Bellot, G., Garcia-Medina, R., Gounon, P., Chiche, J., Roux, D., Pouyssegur,
J., and Mazure, N.M. (2009). Hypoxia-induced autophagy is mediated through
hypoxia-inducible factor induction of BNIP3 and BNIP3L via their BH3
domains. Mol. Cell. Biol. 29, 2570–2581.

Harrison, B., Kraus, M., Burch, L., Stevens, C., Craig, A., Gordon-Weeks, P.,
and Hupp, T.R. (2008). DAPK-1 binding to a linear peptide motif in MAP1B
stimulates autophagy and membrane blebbing. J. Biol. Chem. 283,
9999–10014.

Bensaad, K., Cheung, E.C., and Vousden, K.H. (2009). Modulation of intracellular ROS levels by TIGAR controls autophagy. EMBO J. 28, 3015–3026.

Hayashi-Nishino, M., Fujita, N., Noda, T., Yamaguchi, A., Yoshimori, T., and
Yamamoto, A. (2009). A subdomain of the endoplasmic reticulum forms
a cradle for autophagosome formation. Nat. Cell Biol. 11, 1433–1437.

Betin, V.M., and Lane, J.D. (2009). Caspase cleavage of Atg4D stimulates
GABARAP-L1 processing and triggers mitochondrial targeting and apoptosis.
J. Cell Sci. 122, 2554–2566.

He, C., and Klionsky, D.J. (2009). Regulation mechanisms and signaling pathways of autophagy. Annu. Rev. Genet. 43, 67–93.

Molecular Cell 40, October 22, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc. 291

Molecular Cell

Review
He, C., and Levine, B. (2010). The Beclin 1 interactome. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.
22, 140–149.

Liu, L., Wise, D.R., Diehl, J.A., and Simon, M.C. (2008). Hypoxic reactive
oxygen species regulate the integrated stress response and cell survival.
J. Biol. Chem. 283, 31153–31162.

Herrero-Martin, G., Hoyer-Hansen, M., Garcia-Garcia, C., Fumarola, C., Farkas, T., Lopez-Rivas, A., and Jaattela, M. (2009). TAK1 activates AMPKdependent cytoprotective autophagy in TRAIL-treated epithelial cells. EMBO
J. 28, 677–685.

Madeo, F., Tavernarakis, N., and Kroemer, G. (2010). Does autophagy induction prolong longevity? Nat. Cell Biol. 11, 942–946.

Hetz, C., and Glimcher, L.H. (2009). Fine-tuning of the unfolded protein
response: assembling the IRE1alpha interactome. Mol. Cell 35, 551–561.

Maiuri, M.C., Le Toumelin, G., Criollo, A., Rain, J.C., Gautier, F., Juin, P.,
Tasdemir, E., Pierron, G., Troulinaki, K., Tavernarakis, N., et al. (2007). Functional and physical interaction between Bcl-X(L) and a BH3-like domain in Beclin-1. EMBO J. 26, 2527–2539.

Hetz, C., Thielen, P., Matus, S., Nassif, M., Court, F., Kiffin, R., Martinez, G.,
Cuervo, A.M., Brown, R.H., and Glimcher, L.H. (2009). XBP-1 deficiency in
the nervous system protects against amyotrophic lateral sclerosis by
increasing autophagy. Genes Dev. 23, 2294–2306.

Majmundar, A.J., Wong, W.J., and Simon, M.C. (2010). Hypoxia-inducible
factors and the response to hypoxic stress. Mol. Cell 40, this issue, 294–309.

Hotamisligil, G.S. (2010). Endoplasmic reticulum stress and the inflammatory
basis of metabolic disease. Cell 140, 900–917.

Mammucari, C., Milan, G., Romanello, V., Masiero, E., Rudolf, R., Del Piccolo,
P., Burden, S.J., Di Lisi, R., Sandri, C., Zhao, J., et al. (2007). FoxO3 controls
autophagy in skeletal muscle in vivo. Cell Metab. 6, 458–471.

Huang, Q., Wu, Y.T., Tan, H.L., Ong, C.N., and Shen, H.M. (2009). A novel function of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 in modulation of autophagy and
necrosis under oxidative stress. Cell Death Differ. 16, 264–277.

Mathew, R., Karp, C.M., Beaudoin, B., Vuong, N., Chen, G., Chen, H.Y., Bray,
K., Reddy, A., Bhanot, G., Gelinas, C., et al. (2009). Autophagy suppresses
tumorigenesis through elimination of p62. Cell 137, 1062–1075.

Kimball, S.R., Horetsky, R.L., Ron, D., Jefferson, L.S., and Harding, H.P.
(2003). Mammalian stress granules represent sites of accumulation of stalled
translation initiation complexes. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 284, C273–C284.

Mazure, N.M., and Pouyssegur, J. (2010). Hypoxia-induced autophagy: cell
death or cell survival? Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 22, 177–180.

Kirkin, V., McEwan, D.G., Novak, I., and Dikic, I. (2009). A role for ubiquitin in
selective autophagy. Mol. Cell 34, 259–269.

Michiorri, S., Gelmetti, V., Giarda, E., Lombardi, F., Romano, F., Marongiu, R.,
Nerini-Molteni, S., Sale, P., Vago, R., Arena, G., et al. (2010). The Parkinsonassociated protein PINK1 interacts with Beclin1 and promotes autophagy.
Cell Death Differ. 17, 962–974.

Komatsu, M., Kurokawa, H., Waguri, S., Taguchi, K., Kobayashi, A., Ichimura,
Y., Sou, Y.S., Ueno, I., Sakamoto, A., Tong, K.I., et al. (2010). The selective autophagy substrate p62 activates the stress responsive transcription factor Nrf2
through inactivation of Keap1. Nat. Cell Biol. 12, 213–223.
Kouroku, Y., Fujita, E., Tanida, I., Ueno, T., Isoai, A., Kumagai, H., Ogawa, S.,
Kaufman, R.J., Kominami, E., and Momoi, T. (2007). ER stress (PERK/eIF2alpha phosphorylation) mediates the polyglutamine-induced LC3 conversion, an
essential step for autophagy formation. Cell Death Differ. 14, 230–239.
Kroemer, G., Galluzzi, L., and Brenner, C. (2007). Mitochondrial membrane
permeabilization in cell death. Physiol. Rev. 87, 99–163.
Kume, S., Uzu, T., Horiike, K., Chin-Kanasaki, M., Isshiki, K., Araki, S., Sugimoto, T., Haneda, M., Kashiwagi, A., and Koya, D. (2010). Calorie restriction
enhances cell adaptation to hypoxia through Sirt1-dependent mitochondrial
autophagy in mouse aged kidney. J. Clin. Invest. 120, 1043–1055.
Lan, F., Cacicedo, J.M., Ruderman, N., and Ido, Y. (2008). SIRT1 modulation of
the acetylation status, cytosolic localization, and activity of LKB1. Possible role
in AMP-activated protein kinase activation. J. Biol. Chem. 283, 27628–27635.
Lee, I.H., Cao, L., Mostoslavsky, R., Lombard, D.B., Liu, J., Bruns, N.E.,
Tsokos, M., Alt, F.W., and Finkel, T. (2008). A role for the NAD-dependent
deacetylase Sirt1 in the regulation of autophagy. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
105, 3374–3379.

Milani, M., Rzymski, T., Mellor, H.R., Pike, L., Bottini, A., Generali, D., and
Harris, A.L. (2009). The role of ATF4 stabilization and autophagy in resistance
of breast cancer cells treated with Bortezomib. Cancer Res. 69, 4415–4423.
Mizushima, N. (2010). The role of the Atg1/ULK1 complex in autophagy regulation. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 22, 132–139.
Mizushima, N., Levine, B., Cuervo, A.M., and Klionsky, D.J. (2008). Autophagy
fights disease through cellular self-digestion. Nature 451, 1069–1075.
Mizushima, N., Yoshimori, T., and Levine, B. (2010). Methods in mammalian
autophagy research. Cell 140, 313–326.
Morselli, E., Maiuri, M.C., Markai, M., Megalou, E., Pasparaki, A., Paliaras, K.,
Galluzzi, L., Criollo, A., Malik, S.A., Madeo, F., et al. (2010). Caloric restriction
and resveratrol prolong longevity via the sirtuin-1 dependent induction of
autophagy. Cell Death Disease 1, e10.
Nakamura, T., Furuhashi, M., Li, P., Cao, H., Tuncman, G., Sonenberg, N.,
Gorgun, C.Z., and Hotamisligil, G.S. (2010). Double-stranded RNA-dependent
protein kinase links pathogen sensing with stress and metabolic homeostasis.
Cell 140, 338–348.

Lee, I.H., and Finkel, T. (2009). Regulation of autophagy by the p300 acetyltransferase. J. Biol. Chem. 284, 6322–6328.

Narendra, D.P., Jin, S.M., Tanaka, A., Suen, D.F., Gautier, C.A., Shen, J.,
Cookson, M.R., and Youle, R.J. (2010). PINK1 is selectively stabilized on
impaired mitochondria to activate Parkin. PLoS Biol. 8, e1000298. 10.1371/
journal.pbio.1000298.

Lee, J.S., Li, Q., Lee, J.Y., Lee, S.H., Jeong, J.H., Lee, H.R., Chang, H., Zhou,
F.C., Gao, S.J., Liang, C., et al. (2009). FLIP-mediated autophagy regulation in
cell death control. Nat. Cell Biol. 11, 1355–1362.

Nasrin, N., Kaushik, V.K., Fortier, E., Wall, D., Pearson, K.J., de Cabo, R., and
Bordone, L. (2009). JNK1 phosphorylates SIRT1 and promotes its enzymatic
activity. PLoS ONE 4, e8414. 10.1371/journal.pone.0008414.

Lee, J.Y., Koga, H., Kawaguchi, Y., Tang, W., Wong, E., Gao, Y.S., Pandey,
U.B., Kaushik, S., Tresse, E., Lu, J., et al. (2010). HDAC6 controls autophagosome maturation essential for ubiquitin-selective quality-control autophagy.
EMBO J. 29, 969–980.

Neufeld, T.P. (2010). TOR-dependent control of autophagy: biting the hand
that feeds. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 22, 157–168.

Levine, B., and Kroemer, G. (2008). Autophagy in the pathogenesis of disease.
Cell 132, 27–42.
Liang, J., Shao, S.H., Xu, Z.X., Hennessy, B., Ding, Z., Larrea, M., Kondo, S.,
Dumont, D.J., Gutterman, J.U., Walker, C.L., et al. (2007). The energy sensing
LKB1-AMPK pathway regulates p27(kip1) phosphorylation mediating the
decision to enter autophagy or apoptosis. Nat. Cell Biol. 9, 218–224.
Lipinski, M.M., Hoffman, G., Ng, A., Zhou, W., Py, B.F., Hsu, E., Liu, X.,
Eisenberg, J., Liu, J., Blenis, J., et al. (2010). A genome-wide siRNA screen
reveals multiple mTORC1 independent signaling pathways regulating autophagy under normal nutritional conditions. Dev. Cell 18, 1041–1052.

292 Molecular Cell 40, October 22, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc.

Nivon, M., Richet, E., Codogno, P., Arrigo, A.P., and Kretz-Remy, C. (2009).
Autophagy activation by NFkappaB is essential for cell survival after heat
shock. Autophagy 5, 766–783.
Novak, I., Kirkin, V., McEwan, D.G., Zhang, J., Wild, P., Rozenknop, A., Rogov,
V., Lohr, F., Popovic, D., Occhipinti, A., et al. (2010). Nix is a selective autophagy receptor for mitochondrial clearance. EMBO Rep. 11, 45–51.
Orsi, A., Polson, H.E., and Tooze, S.A. (2010). Membrane trafficking events
that partake in autophagy. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 22, 150–156.
Pattingre, S., Tassa, A., Qu, X., Garuti, R., Liang, X.H., Mizushima, N., Packer,
M., Schneider, M.D., and Levine, B. (2005). Bcl-2 antiapoptotic proteins inhibit
Beclin 1-dependent autophagy. Cell 122, 927–939.

Molecular Cell

Review
Pattingre, S., Bauvy, C., Carpentier, S., Levade, T., Levine, B., and Codogno,
P. (2009). Role of JNK1-dependent Bcl-2 phosphorylation in ceramideinduced macroautophagy. J. Biol. Chem. 284, 2719–2728.
Polson, H.E., de Lartigue, J., Rigden, D.J., Reedijk, M., Urbe, S., Clague, M.J.,
and Tooze, S.A. (2010). Mammalian Atg18 (WIPI2) localizes to omegasomeanchored phagophores and positively regulates LC3 lipidation. Autophagy 6,
Published online May 23, 2010.
Qing, G., Yan, P., Qu, Z., Liu, H., and Xiao, G. (2007). Hsp90 regulates processing of NF-kappa B2 p100 involving protection of NF-kappa B-inducing kinase
(NIK) from autophagy-mediated degradation. Cell Res. 17, 520–530.
Ravikumar, B., Moreau, K., Jahreiss, L., Puri, C., and Rubinsztein, D.C. (2010).
Plasma membrane contributes to the formation of pre-autophagosomal structures. Nat. Cell Biol. 12, 747–757.
Rouschop, K.M., van den Beucken, T., Dubois, L., Niessen, H., Bussink, J.,
Savelkouls, K., Keulers, T., Mujcic, H., Landuyt, W., Voncken, J.W., et al.
(2010). The unfolded protein response protects human tumor cells during
hypoxia through regulation of the autophagy genes MAP1LC3B and ATG5.
J. Clin. Invest. 120, 127–141.
Ruderman, N.B., Xu, X.J., Nelson, L., Cacicedo, J.M., Saha, A.K., Lan, F., and
Ido, Y. (2010). AMPK and SIRT1: a long-standing partnership? Am. J. Physiol.
Endocrinol. Metab. 298, E751–E760.

Talloczy, Z., Virgin, H.W., 4th, and Levine, B. (2006). PKR-dependent autophagic degradation of herpes simplex virus type 1. Autophagy 2, 24–29.
Vicencio, J.M., Ortiz, C., Criollo, A., Jones, A.W., Kepp, O., Galluzzi, L., Joza,
N., Vitale, I., Morselli, E., Tailler, M., et al. (2009). The inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor regulates autophagy through its interaction with Beclin 1.
Cell Death Differ. 16, 1006–1017.
Virgin, H.W., and Levine, B. (2009). Autophagy genes in immunity. Nat. Immunol. 10, 461–470.
Webber, J.L., and Tooze, S.A. (2010). Coordinated regulation of autophagy by
p38alpha MAPK through mAtg9 and p38IP. EMBO J. 29, 27–40.
Wei, Y., Pattingre, S., Sinha, S., Bassik, M., and Levine, B. (2008). JNK1-mediated phosphorylation of Bcl-2 regulates starvation-induced autophagy. Mol.
Cell 30, 678–688.
Weidberg, H., Shvets, E., Shpilka, T., Shimron, F., Shinder, V., and Elazar, Z.
(2010). LC3 and GATE-16/GABARAP subfamilies are both essential yet act
differently in autophagosome biogenesis. EMBO J. 29, 1792–1802.
Williams, A., Sarkar, S., Cuddon, P., Ttofi, E.K., Saiki, S., Siddiqi, F.H.,
Jahreiss, L., Fleming, A., Pask, D., Goldsmith, P., et al. (2008). Novel targets
for Huntington’s disease in an mTOR-independent autophagy pathway. Nat.
Chem. Biol. 4, 295–305.

Saitoh, T., Fujita, N., Hayashi, T., Takahara, K., Satoh, T., Lee, H., Matsunaga,
K., Kageyama, S., Omori, H., Noda, T., et al. (2009). Atg9a controls dsDNAdriven dynamic translocation of STING and the innate immune response.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 10842–10846.

Wirawan, E., Vande Walle, L., Kersse, K., Cornelis, S., Claerhour, S., Vanoverbergher, I., Roelandt, R., de Rycke, R., Verspuren, J., Declercq, W., et al.
(2010). Caspase-mediated cleavage of Beclin-1 inactivates Beclin-1-induced
autophagy and enhances apoptosis by promoting the release of proapoptotic
factors from mitochondria. Cell Death Disease 1, e18.

Sandoval, H., Thiagarajan, P., Dasgupta, S.K., Schumacher, A., Prchal, J.T.,
Chen, M., and Wang, J. (2008). Essential role for Nix in autophagic maturation
of erythroid cells. Nature 454, 232–235.

Wong, C.H., Iskandar, K.B., Yadav, S.K., Hirpara, J.L., Loh, T., and Pervaiz, S.
(2010). Simultaneous induction of non-canonical autophagy and apoptosis in
cancer cells by ROS-dependent ERK and JNK activation. PLoS ONE 5, e9996.
10.1371/journal.pone.0009996.

Sarkar, S., Perlstein, E.O., Imarisio, S., Pineau, S., Cordenier, A., Maglathlin,
R.L., Webster, J.A., Lewis, T.A., O’Kane, C.J., Schreiber, S.L., et al. (2007).
Small molecules enhance autophagy and reduce toxicity in Huntington’s
disease models. Nat. Chem. Biol. 3, 331–338.

Xia, H.G., Zhang, L., Chen, G., Zhang, T., Liu, J., Jin, M., Ma, X., Ma, D., and
Yuan, J. (2010). Control of basal autophagy by calpain1 mediated cleavage
of ATG5. Autophagy 6, 61–66.

Scherz-Shouval, R., Shvets, E., Fass, E., Shorer, H., Gil, L., and Elazar, Z.
(2007). Reactive oxygen species are essential for autophagy and specifically
regulate the activity of Atg4. EMBO J. 26, 1749–1760.
Sengupta, S., Peterson, T.R., and Sabatini, D.M. (2010). Regulation of the
mTor complex 1 by nutrients, growth factors, and stress. Mol. Cell 40, this
issue, 310–322.
Shi, C.S., and Kehrl, J.H. (2008). MyD88 and Trif target Beclin 1 to trigger autophagy in macrophages. J. Biol. Chem. 283, 33175–33182.
Shi, C.S., and Kehrl, J.H. (2010). TRAF6 and A20 regulate lysine 63-linked
ubiquitination of Beclin-1 to control TLR4-induced autophagy. Sci. Signal. 3,
ra42.
Sumpter, R., Jr., and Levine, B. (2010). Autophagy and innate immunity: triggering, targeting and tuning. Semin. Cell. Dev. Biol. 21, 699–711.
Talloczy, Z., Jiang, W., Virgin, H.W., 4th, Leib, D.A., Scheuner, D., Kaufman,
R.J., Eskelinen, E.L., and Levine, B. (2002). Regulation of starvation- and
virus-induced autophagy by the eIF2alpha kinase signaling pathway. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99, 190–195.

Yang, Z., and Klionsky, D.J. (2010). Mammalian autophagy: core molecular
machinery and signaling regulation. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 22, 124–131.
Yang, L., Li, P., Fu, S., Calay, E.S., and Hotamisligil, G.S. (2010). Defective
hepatic autophagy in obesity promotes ER stress and causes insulin resistance. Cell Metab. 11, 467–478.
Yla-Anttila, P., Vihinen, H., Jokitalo, E., and Eskelinen, E.L. (2009). 3D tomography reveals connections between the phagophore and endoplasmic reticulum. Autophagy 5, 1180–1185.
Yousefi, S., Perozzo, R., Schmid, I., Ziemiecki, A., Schaffner, T., Scapozza, L.,
Brunner, T., and Simon, H.U. (2006). Calpain-mediated cleavage of Atg5
switches autophagy to apoptosis. Nat. Cell Biol. 8, 1124–1132.
Zalckvar, E., Berissi, H., Mizrachy, L., Idelchuk, Y., Koren, I., Eisenstein, M.,
Sabanay, H., Pinkas-Kramarski, R., and Kimchi, A. (2009). DAP-kinase-mediated phosphorylation on the BH3 domain of beclin 1 promotes dissociation of
beclin 1 from Bcl-XL and induction of autophagy. EMBO Rep. 10, 285–292.
Zhao, Y., Yang, J., Liao, W., Liu, X., Zhang, H., Wang, S., Wang, D., Feng, J.,
Yu, L., and Zhu, W.G. (2010). Cytosolic FoxO1 is essential for the induction of
autophagy and tumour suppressor activity. Nat. Cell Biol. 12, 665–675.

Molecular Cell 40, October 22, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc. 293

