Post-Piagetian Constructivism for Grounded Knowledge Acquisition
Harold Henry Chaput
Department of Computer Sciences
Taylor Hall 2.124 [C0500]
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712-1188 USA
chaput@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Piagetian constructivism, an attractive model of grounded
knowledge acquisition, has been shy on details, making
modeling difficult. New research in developmental cogition
has shed some light on these details. More accurate and
powerful constructivist models can now be built, and one
such model – the Constructivist Learning Architecture – is
proposed.

Introduction
Constructivism Then and Now
Piaget (1952) proposed a mechanism by which infants integrate experience into progressively higher-level representations, which he called constructivism. According to
constructivism, infants progress from simple to sophisticated models of the world by use of a change mechanism
that allows the infant to build higher-level representations
from lower-level ones. Constructivism is a powerful model
of grounded knowledge acquisition that has been applied to
grounded knowledge acquisition tasks with considerable
success (Drescher 1991; Cohen et al. 1997).
Constructivism, though, has long been criticized for its
vagueness regarding the precise nature of the change mechanism. The lack of detail in this area has hampered the production of more powerful models of cognitive
development, and has led some to suggest that the primitives of the infant’s world model (such as solidity and causality) are innate (see Spelke et al. 1992). However, recent
studies of infant cognitive development (Cohen and
Younger 1984; Cohen and Amsel 1998; Cohen et al.1998)
have provided strong evidence that these primitives are
indeed acquired and, in doing so, they have shed light on
the details of the change mechanism itself.
Cohen (1998) has integrated several of these studies to
produce a set of principles that describe constructivist
development using an information processing approach.
Specifically, Cohen and Cashon (2001) postulate that
infants organize stimuli into categories based on criteria
such as frequency, invariance and co-occurrence. Then,
infants build higher-level representations by applying these
Copyright © 2000, American Association for Artificial
(www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

criteria to lower-level representations. Given this work, it is
now possible to implement a more accurate computational
model of developmental cognition. In addition, these studies provide a body of empirical data against which developmental models can be tested.

Approach
Constructivist Learning Architecture
The Constructivist Learning Architecture (CLA) is such a
model. Based on the principles of constructivist learning
described by Cohen and Cashon (2001), CLA uses a hierarchy of Self-Organizing Maps, or SOMs (Kohonen 1997), to
build representations of observed stimuli at progressively
higher levels of abstraction. The SOM is recognized as a
useful tool for the development of categories. By connecting the SOMs hierarchically, higher-level representations
can be built from the activation of lower-level representations.
As illustrated in Figure 1, sensory information is introduced to CLA as a feature vector. As multiple feature vectors are introduced to CLA over time, the first layer of CLA
uses a SOM to generate categories. This layer is then used
to create an activation matrix by measuring the euclidean
distance between the stimulus vector and the generated categories. This activation matrix then becomes a new feature
vector for the next layer. This process continues up to arbitrarily higher layers, and forms the foundation of CLA.
Other layer connection techniques – such as delay, recursion, and many-to-one connections – can be employed to
create more sophisticated architectures.
In this way, high-level representations can be built from
raw stimuli, and all representations are ultimately defined
in terms of the system’s sensorimotor apparatus. The resulting representations are distributed, both laterally (within a
layer) and hierarchically (across layers). Also, since all levels of processing are maintained throughout development,
confusion at a higher level can be handled gracefully by
falling back to a lower level. Finally, CLA’s modular design
makes it well suited for temporal and cross-modal knowledge acquisition.
CLA has been used to replicate various studies from
developmental cognition, like infants’ acquisition of causality and word boundary detection. CLA has also been
applied to autonomous robotic control by building a world

model through interaction with the environment and using
this world model to develop environment-appropriate
behaviors and recover from sensor trauma.

Conclusion
Developmental cognition is a powerful model for grounded
knowledge acquisition. The new discoveries coming out of
developmental psychology are providing the details necessary to create a new generation of infant learning models
that are more accurate and more powerful. Robots can use
these models to generate the knowledge necessary for
robust and sophisticated behavior. Indeed, the developmental approach can be employed in a wide variety of domains
that would benefit from grounded representations, such as
language and common sense reasoning. And by building
models of developmental cognition, we can further understand the process of human learning itself.

References
Cohen, L. B. 1998. An information processing approach to
infant perception and cognition. In Butterworth, G., and
Simion F. eds. Development of Sensory, Motor, and Cognitive Capabilities in Early Infancy: From Sensation to Cognition, 277-300. East Sussex: Psychology Press.
Cohen, L. B and Amsel, G. 1998. Precursors to infants’ perception of causality. Infant Behavior & Development 21
(4), 713-732.
Cohen, L.B.; Amsel, G.; Redford, M. A.; and Casasola, M.
1998. The development of infant causal perception. In Slator, A. ed. Perceptual Development: Visual, auditory and
speech perception in infancy. London: UCL Press and Taylor and Francis.
Cohen, P. R.; Atkin, M.; Oates, T.; and Beal, C. R. 1997.
Neo: Learning conceptual knowledge by sensorimotor
interaction with an environment. In Proceedings of the First
International Conference on Autonomous Agents. 170-177.
Cohen, L. B. and Cashon, C. H. 2001. Infant object segregation implies information integration. Journal of Experi-

mental Child Psychology. Forthcoming.
Cohen, L. B. and Younger, B. A. 1984. Infant perception of
angular relations. Infant Behavior and Development, 7, 3747.
Drescher, G. L. 1991. Made-Up Minds, a Constructivist
Approach to Artificial Intelligence. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Kohonen, T. 1997. Self-Organizing Maps. New York:
Springer-Verlag.
Piaget, J. 1952. The Origins of Intelligence in Children.
New York: International Universities Press. (Originally
published 1936.)
Spelke, E. S.; Brienlinger, K.; Macomber, J.; and Jacobson,
K. 1992. Origins of knowledge. Psychological Review, Vol.
99, No. 4, 605-632.

