Consciousness: Drinking from the Firehose of Experience£
Benjamin Kuipers
Computer Science Department
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, Texas 78712 USA
kuipers@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
The problem of consciousness has captured the imagination
of philosophers, neuroscientists, and the general public, but
has received little attention within AI. However, concepts
from robotics and computer vision hold great promise to account for the major aspects of the phenomenon of consciousness, including philosophically problematical aspects such as
the vividness of qualia, the first-person character of conscious
experience, and the property of intentionality. This paper
presents and evaluates such an account against eleven features of consciousness “that any philosophical-scientific theory should hope to explain”, according to the philosopher and
prominent AI critic John Searle.

The position I argue here is that the subjective, firstperson nature of consciousness can be explained in terms
of the ongoing stream of sensorimotor experience (the “firehose of experience” of the title) and the symbolic pointers
into that stream (which we call “trackers”) that enable a
computational process to cope with its volume.
Consciousness also apparently constructs a plausible, coherent, sequential narrative for the activities of a large, unsynchronized collection of unconscious parallel processes in
the mind. How this works, and how it is implemented in the
brain, is a fascinating and difficult technical problem, but it
does not seem to raise philosophical difficulties.

Other Approaches to Consciousness

The Problem of Consciousness
Artificial Intelligence is the use of computational concepts
to model the phenomena of mind. Consciousness is one of
the most central and conspicuous aspects of mind. In spite of
this, AI researchers have mostly avoided the problem of consciousness in favor of modeling cognitive, linguistic, perceptual, and motor control aspects of mind. However, in
response to a recent discussion of consciousness by the wellknown philosopher and AI critic John Searle (Searle 2004),
it seems to me that we are in a position to sketch out a plausible computational account of consciousness.
Consciousness is a phenomenon with many aspects.
Searle argues that the difficult aspects of consciousness are
those that make up the subjective nature of first-person experience. There is clearly a qualitative difference between
thinking about the color red with my eyes closed in a dark
room, and my own immediate experiences of seeing a red
rose or an apple or a sunset. Philosophers use the term
qualia (singular quale) for these immediate sensory experiences. Furthermore, when I see a rose or an apple, I see
it as an object in the world, not as a patch of color on my
retina. Philosophers refer to this as intentionality.
£ This work has taken place in the Intelligent Robotics Lab at
the Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin. Research of the Intelligent Robotics lab is supported in part
by grants from the National Science Foundation (IIS-0413257),
from the National Institutes of Health (EY016089), and by an IBM
Faculty Research Award.
Copyright c 2005, American Association for Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

­

National Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-05)
http://www.cs.utexas.edu/˜qr/papers/Kuipers-aaai-05.html

There have been a number of recent books on the problem
of consciousness, many of them from a neurobiological perspective. The more clinically oriented books (Sacks 1985;
Damasio 1999) often appeal to pathological cases, where
consciousness is incomplete or distorted in various ways,
to illuminate the structure of the phenomenon of human
consciousness through its natural breaking points. Another
approach, taken by Crick and Koch (Crick & Koch 2003;
Koch 2003), examines in detail the brain pathways that
contribute to visual attention and visual consciousness in
humans and in macaque monkeys. Minsky (1985), Baars
(1988), and Dennett (1991) propose architectures whereby
consciousness emerges from the interactions among large
numbers of simple modules.
John Searle is a distinguished critic of strong AI: the claim
that a successful computational model of an intelligent mind
would actually be an intelligent mind. His famous “Chinese room” example (Searle 1980) argues that even a behaviorally successful computational model would fail to have a
mind. In some sense, it would just be “faking it.”
In Searle’s recent book on the philosophy of mind (Searle
2004), he articulates a position he calls biological naturalism that describes the mind, and consciousness in particular,
as “entirely caused by lower level neurobiological processes
in the brain.” Although Searle rejects the idea that the mind’s
relation to the brain is similar to a program’s relation to a
computer, he explicitly endorses the notion that the body is
a biological machine, and therefore that machines (at least
biological ones) can have minds, and can even be conscious.
In spite of being nothing beyond physical processes, Searle

holds that consciousness is not reducible to those physical
processes because consciousness “has a first-person ontology” while the description of physical processes occurring
in the brain “has a third-person ontology.” He lays out eleven
central features of consciousness “that any philosophicalscientific theory should hope to explain.” In the following three sections, I describe how a robotics researcher approaches sensorimotor interaction; propose a computational
model of consciousness; and evaluate the prospects for using
this model to explain Searle’s eleven features of consciousness.

Sensorimotor Interaction in Robotics
When a robot interacts continually with its environment
through its sensors and effectors, it is often productive to
model that interaction as a continuous dynamical system,
moving through a continuous state space toward an attractor.
In the situations we will consider, such a dynamical system
can be approximated by a discrete but fine-grained computational model, so by taking this view of the robot we are not
moving outside the domain of computational modeling.

A Simple Robot in a Static World
Consider a simple robot agent in a static environment. In a
static world, the only possible changes are to the state of the
robot’s body within the environment, which is represented
by a time-varying state vector ´Øµ. The derivative of with
respect to time is written . For a simple mobile robot moving on a planar surface, would have the form ´Ü Ý µ, representing the pose (position ´Ü Ý µ plus orientation ) of the
robot within its environment. A robot with a more complex
body would have a larger state vector .
We distinguish the environment and the robot’s body from
the computational process (which we will call the “agent”),
that receives the sense vector ´Øµ from the environment and
determines a motor vector ´Øµ to send out to its body in the
environment. Let be the symbolic state of the agent’s internal computational process. Note that the agent has access
to its sense vector , and can set its own motor vector ,
but it only has indirect access to its own state vector . The
coupled system consisting of the robot agent and its environment can be described as a dynamical system. (Here we
superimpose two useful standard representations: the block
diagram and the differential equation.)

Ü

Ü

Ü

Ü

Ü

Ù

Ñ
Þ

World:

Þ
Agent:
À

Þ

Ü

Ü
Þ

ÜÙ
Ü

´

µ

(1)
(2)

´ µ

Ù

ÑÞ
Þ

Ë Ð Ø´
À´ µ

Ù

Ù

µ

(3)
(4)

Equation (1) describes how the robot’s state changes as a
function of its current state and the motor vector. The function represents the physics of the world and the robot’s
body, including all the complexities of motor performance,

wheel friction, barriers to motion, and so on. is not known
to the agent (or to the human researcher, who typically uses
simplified approximations). Equation (2) describes the dependence of the robot’s sensor input on its current state. The
function is also extremely complex and not known to the
agent. Equation (3) says that, from time to time, based on its
internal symbolic state and its current observations , the
agent selects a reactive control law À which determines the
current value ´Øµ of the motor vector as a function of the
current value ´Øµ of the sensor input (equation 4).
For a particular choice of the control law À , equations
(1,2,4) together define the coupled robot-environment system as a dynamical system, which specifies trajectories of
´ ´Øµ ´Øµµ that the robot must follow. The robot’s behavior alternates between (a) following a trajectory determined
by a particular dynamical system until reaching a termination condition, and then (b) selecting a new control law À
that transforms the coupled robot-environment system into
a different dynamical system, with different trajectories to
follow (Kuipers 2000).

Ñ

Ù
Þ

Þ

Ü Ü

The Firehose of Experience
When engineering a robot controller, a human designer typically works hard to keep the model tractable by reducing
the dimensionality of the state, motor, and sensor vectors.
However, as robots become more complex, or as we desire
to apply this model to humans, these vectors become very
high-dimensional.
In a biological agent, the motor vector includes control signals for hundreds or thousands of individual muscles.
An artificial robot could have dozens to hundreds of motors
(though a simple mobile robot will have just two).
The sensor stream ´Øµ is what I call “the firehose of experience” — the extremely high bandwidth stream of sensor
data that the agent must cope with, continually. For a biological agent such as a human, the sense vector contains
millions of components representing the individual receptors in the two retinas, the cochleal cells in the two ears, and
the many touch and pain receptors over the entire skin, not
to mention taste, smell, balance, proprioception, and other
senses. Robot senses are nowhere near as rich as human
senses, but they still provide information at an overwhelming rate. (A stereo pair of color cameras alone generates data
at over 440 megabits per second.) With such a high data rate,
any processing applied to the entire sensor stream must be
simple, local, and parallel. In the human brain, arriving sensory information is stored in some form of short-term memory, remains available for a short time, and then is replaced
by newly arriving information.
Modifying Searle’s Chinese Room metaphor (Searle
1980), in addition to comparatively infrequent slips of paper providing symbolic input and output, the room receives
a huge torrent of sensory information that rushes in through
one wall, flows rapidly through the room, and out the other
wall, never to be recovered. Inside the room, John can examine the stream as it flows past, and can perhaps record fragments of the stream or make new symbolic notations based
on his examination, in accordance with the rules specified in
the room.

Ù

Þ

Þ

The important point is that the “firehose of experience”
provides information at a rate much greater than the available symbolic inference and storage mechanisms can handle. The best we can hope for is to provide pointers into the
ongoing stream, so that relevant portions can be retrieved
when needed.

Pointers into the Sensor Stream
The key concept for making sense of the “firehose of experience” is the tracker, a set of symbolic pointers into the
sensor stream that maintains the correspondence between a
higher-level, symbolically represented concept and its everchanging image in the sensor stream. (Think of tracking a
person walking across a scene while you are attending to
something else in the scene.)
We will describe trackers in the framework of equations
(1-4) by equations of the form
Ñ ´Øµ

Þ

´ ´Øµµ

(5)

Þ

meaning that an individual tracker takes as input the sensor stream ´Øµ and produces as output the symbolic description Ñ ´Øµ, which is part of the symbolic computational
state ´Øµ of the agent. The subscript indicates that multiple trackers may be active at any given time.
An individual tracker
may be created “top-down” by
a symbolic inference process, or “bottom-up” triggered by
detection of a localized feature in the sensory stream ´Øµ.
The human visual system includes parallel feature-detection
mechanisms that trigger on certain “pop-out” colors and textures.
This is not a new idea. Versions of the sensorimotor
tracker concept include Minsky’s “vision frames” (1975),
Marr and Nishihara’s “spatial models” (1978), Ullman’s “visual routines” (1984), Agre and Chapman’s “indexical references” (1987), Pylyshyn’s “FINSTs” (1989), Kahneman
and Triesman’s “object files” (1992), Ballard, et al, “deictic codes” (1997), and Coradeschi and Saffiotti’s “perceptual
anchoring” (2003).
The feedback-based technology for tracking objects from
changing sensor input has its roots in radar signal interpretation from the 1940s (Wiener 1948; Gelb 1974). In the
computer vision literature, methods for describing and tracking the outlines of extended objects have been developing
since the 1980s (Blake & Yuille 1992; Hutchinson, Hager,
& Corke 1996). A tracker embodies one kind of active perception, dynamically maintaining pointers to the image of
its target as it moves through the sensor stream.
A tracker can be hierarchically structured, with subordinate trackers for parts of the object being tracked. Imagine
the agent watching a person walk across the field of view.
The tracker dynamically updates the outline of the person
against the background, separating figure from ground. The
tracker may include subordinate trackers for torso, head,
arms, legs, and so on (Marr & Nishihara 1978).
Quine (1961) describes human knowledge as a symbolic
“web of belief” anchored at the periphery in sensorimotor
experience. Trackers are the anchoring devices for symbols.
We say that a tracker is bound to a spatio-temporal segment

Ñ

Þ

of the sensor stream when that portion of ongoing experience satisfies the criteria of the tracker’s defining concept,
and when tracking is successful in real time. The tracker
mediates between signal processing and symbol manipulation. At the signal processing end, the tracker implements
a dynamical system keeping its pointers corresponding as
closely as possible with the relevant portion of the sensor
stream. At the symbol manipulation end, the tracker serves
as a logical constant, with time-dependent predicates representing the attributes of the tracked object.
The location of the tracker within the sensor stream is regulated and updated by control laws, responding to the image
properties expected for the tracked concept and their contrast
with the background. Image processing strategies such as
dynamical “snakes” (Blake & Yuille 1992) represent changing boundaries between figure and ground. With adequate
contrast, the high temporal granularity of the sensor stream
means that updating the state of the tracker is not difficult.
With increasing knowledge about the sensor image of the
tracked concept, the tracker can maintain a good expectation about the relevant portion of the sensor stream even in
the presence of occlusion, poor contrast, and other perceptual problems.
Trackers implement the principle that “the world is its
own best model.” When a tracker is bound to a portion of
ongoing experience, current sensor data is easily available
to whatever symbolic cognitive processes might be active,
because the tracker provides efficient access into the correct
portion of the sensor stream.
The symbolic description of a high-level concept typically
includes a number of attributes. If an instance of such a
concept is bound to an active tracker, the values of such attributes can be extracted directly from the sensor stream. For
example, in response to a query about the color of a tracked
object, it is not necessary to retrieve a fact previously stored
in memory. A sample can be extracted from the current
sensor stream at a location pointed to by the tracker, and
classified according to a symbolic taxonomy to produce a
meaningful answer to the color question. There is evidence
that human confidence in the completeness and quality of
perception comes from this ability to retrieve high-quality
data from the sensor stream on demand, rather than from
complete processing of the image (Ballard, Hayhoe, & Pelz
1995; O’Regan & No¨e 2001).
If a tracker loses its target, for example due to occlusion
or poor image quality, it predicts the location of the target
and attempts to reacquire it over some time interval. A hierarchical tracker might lose its more detailed components
as the target moves to the periphery of the visual field, perhaps becoming little more than a “blob” tracker representing
only location and extent. But if more detailed information
is needed, a quick saccade can bring the target back to the
fovea, the hierarchical structure of the tracker is rebound,
and questions can be answered from vived visual input as if
it were continually available (Ballard et al. 1997).
The phenomenon of “change blindness” (O’Regan & No¨e
2001) illustrates some of the properties of trackers. People
can fail to notice startlingly large changes in a visual scene
due to intense focus of attention, or due to momentary breaks

in the sensor stream that require the trackers to be rebound.

A Computational Account of Consciousness
We extend our previous simple model of the robot agent to
incorporate trackers. We also extend it to non-static worlds
by distinguishing between the state of the robot’s body and
the state of the external world.

Ü

Û

ÜÛ
Þ

ÜÛÙ
ÜÛ
Þ
Ù
Agent:
Ñ Ø
ÞØ
Ñ ÍÔ Ø Ñ Þ
À
Ë Ð Ø Ñ Þ
Ù À ÞÑ
World:

℄

´

µ

´

´ µ

´ ´ µµ

´

´

µ

´

µ

Evaluating a Theory of Consciousness

(6)
(7)

µ

(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)

µ

The trackers (8) provide active, time-varying assertions
directly grounded in the sensor stream. Equation (9) refers
to the update of the agent’s knowledge representation, based
on its prior state and sensor input.1
According to the model proposed here, what it means to
be conscious, what it means for an agent to have a subjective,
first-person view of the world, is for the agent to have:

Þ

Ù

1. a high-volume sensor stream ´Øµ and a motor stream ´Øµ
that are coupled, through the world and the robot’s body,
as described by equations (6-7);
2. methods for activating trackers both top-down as directed
by the symbolic reasoning system, and bottom-up as triggered by features in the sensory input stream;

Þ

´ ´Øµµ (equation 8)
3. a collection of trackers Ñ ´Øµ
capable of providing direct or indirect grounding in the
sensor stream for the logical constants in the agent’s symbolic knowledge representation system;

Ù

For its consciousness to be “human-like”, a robot would
have to be sufficiently similar to humans in sensorimotor
system, symbolic processing capabilities, knowledge base,
and cultural background. What “sufficiently” means here
remains to be seen. Consider the difficulty in comparing human and dolphin consciousness, due to differences in sensorimotor system, environment, knowledge, and culture.

Þ Ñ

4. a reasoning system capable of selecting control laws
´Øµ
À ´ ´Øµ
´Øµµ (equation (10-11)).
This is an unabashedly “Strong AI” claim. It does not appeal to the Turing Test (Turing 1950), to claim that such a
robot behaves as if it were conscious. It says that, if we can
examine the detailed nature of a robot agent’s internal processing, and we can show that it corresponds to this model,
then we know that it genuinely is conscious.
Admittedly, the structural model doesn’t help us know
what it “feels like” to be this robot, any more than we can
know what it feels like to be a bat, or a dolphin, or John
Searle. But because we can verify that it has a “firehose of
experience”, and uses trackers to maintain the appropriate
causal connections among its perceptions, its actions, and
its stored knowledge, then we know that it is conscious.
1
The ÍÔ Ø function in equation (9) encapsulates several
large, important issues, including how attention is managed and
how the coherent sequential narrative of subjective consciousness
is constructed (see the discussion of Unity below).

It is not yet possible to build a robot with sufficiently rich
sensorimotor interaction with the physical environment, and
a sufficiently rich capability for tracking and reasoning about
its sensor and motor streams, to be comparable with human
consciousness. The remaining barriers, however, appear to
be technical rather than philosophical. The purpose of this
essay is to argue that our current approach is plausible as an
explanation of consciousness.
Searle (Searle 2004, pp. 134–145) provides eleven central
features of consciousness “that any philosophical-scientific
theory should hope to explain.” We can begin evaluating
this theory of consciousness by discussing how well such a
computational model might account for these features. Each
of the following subsections is titled with Searle’s name for
a feature, followed by a quote from his description of it.

Qualitativeness
Every conscious state has a qualitative feel to it.
. . . [This includes] conscious states such as feeling a
pain or tasting ice cream . . . [and also] thinking two
plus two equals four (Searle 2004, p. 134).
There’s a difference between thinking about the color red
with my eyes closed in a dark room, and the immediate experiences (qualia) of seeing a red rose or apple or sunset.
The vividness, intensity, and immediacy of subjective experience are due to the enormous information content of the
sensor stream ´Øµ. The intensity of subjective experience
decreases with the information content of the input: from
live multisensory experience, to memories or dreams of experiences, to viewing a color photograph, to text or verbal
descriptions.
Trackers do not capture the experience itself, but they
provide structure to William James’ “one great blooming,
buzzing confusion”. By providing rapid access to specified
parts of the sensory stream, trackers (in vision at least) maintain the illusion that the entire visual field is perceived with
the same high fidelity as the point of foveal attention (Ballard et al. 1997; O’Regan & No¨e 2001).
If an attribute value such as the color red is stored as a
symbol “red” in memory, its information content is determined by the number of other possible color symbols that
could have been stored as a value of that attribute: at most
a dozen bits or so. On the other hand, if a tracker is bound
to a region in the sensor stream, the number of bits of color
information streaming past, even in a small region, is orders
of magnitude larger.
The higher information content of the sensor stream
means that attribute values drawn from sensory experience
necessarily include more distinctions than are available in,

Þ

for example, common vocabulary. The reds of roses, apples, and sunsets are different, though their distributions
may overlap. The agent who has experienced these qualia
possesses more distinctions than one who hasn’t, and can
recognize the rarity of a sunset-colored rose.
Although it is implausible for the entire sensory stream to
be stored in long-term memory, at least some qualia (e.g.,
the pain of a kidney stone or the smell of a freshly-baked
madeleine) can be stored in memory and can serve as associative links to memories of previous experiences. The high
information content of a quale makes it more likely to be
able to select out a single distinctive association from the
huge contents of long-term memory.
What is the practical value of all this extra information?
It helps to keep the hallucinations down. Symbolic (logical)
theories are subject to multiple interpretations. Larger theories have fewer interpretations. The addition of sensorimotor
grounding through trackers provides a huge number of additional axioms to such a theory, corresponding to input from
the sensor stream, and thereby constrains the possible interpretations. Active trackers provide strong evidence, solidly
grounded in the sensor stream, to eliminate incorrect perceptual hypotheses.
There is a compelling argument that perception requires
abduction (Shanahan 2005). There must be a process that
proposes hypotheses to account for ongoing sensor data. If
this process were purely bottom-up (i.e., driven by the sensor data), then in the absence of the sensor stream, no hypotheses would be generated and no perception would take
place. However, experience suggests that there are significant top-down and perhaps random processes for generating
hypotheses. Under conditions of sensory deprivation, people
tend to hallucinate, that is, to generate perceptual hypotheses poorly grounded in sensor input. The high information
content of the sensor stream helps to keep the generation and
refutation of perceptual hypotheses in balance.

Subjectivity
Because of the qualitative character of consciousness,
conscious states exist only when they are experienced
by a human or animal subject. . . . Another way to make
this same point is to say that consciousness has a firstperson ontology (Searle 2004, p. 135).
Consciousness is experienced exclusively from a firstperson point of view. (I reject Searle’s explicit restriction
of conscious experience to “a human or animal subject”.)
What it means for an agent to have a first-person point of
view is for it to have access to the sensor and motor streams
from its own body. That is, its body is physically embedded
in the world, and equations (6-7) describe the causal path
from its actions to its perceptions . By selecting a control
law À , the agent creates a causal path from its sensory input
to its motor output , closing the loop and giving it some
degree of control over its body. Only the agent itself has
access to the sensor stream ´Øµ from its own body, or to the
motor output stream ´Øµ, and only the agent is in a position
to select and impose a control law À relating them.
In principle, the agent can learn from experience which

Þ

Ù

Ù

Ù

Þ

Þ

aspects of its perceptions are under its direct control, and
which are not, therefore learning to separate its concept of
itself ( ) from its concept of its environment ( ) (Philipona,
O’Regan, & Nadal 2003). This distinction comes not from
anatomy, but from the existence of tight control loops. Virtual reality and telepresence are subjectively compelling exactly because humans are quickly able to learn novel models
of senses, actions, body, and world from interactive experience.
Exceptions to the agent’s privileged access to its own sensorimotor system confirm this description of the first-person
point of view. Searle (Searle 2004, p.142) cites an experiment by the neurosurgeon Wilder Penfield, who was able to
stimulate a patient’s motor neurons directly, to raise the patient’s arm, prompting a response from the patient who said,
“I didn’t do that, you did.” This corresponds to the surgeon
being able to set ´Øµ directly, without the patient selecting
a control law.

Ü

Û

Ù

Unity
At present, I do not just experience the feelings in my
fingertips, the pressure of the shirt against my neck, and
the sight of the falling autumn leaves outside, but I experience all of these as part of a single, unified, conscious field (Searle 2004, p. 136).
Similarly, we experience the audio-visual surround as a
single unified field, continuous in space and time, in spite of
a variety of disturbing facts about our actual sensory input
(Koch 2003). The fovea has vastly higher resolution than
the periphery of the retina, and the blind spot has no resolution at all. The density of color-receptive cones is even more
strongly biased toward the foveal area and away from the periphery. Auditory and visual evidence from the same event
reaches the brain at different times. For example, it is wellknown that reaction time to an auditory stimulus is about 50
ms faster than to a visual stimulus. Furthermore, the auditory stimulus from an event can be delayed up to about 80
ms from the visual stimulus without interfering with the perception of simultaneity.
The apparent unity of perception is a plausible coherent
narrative, constructed 50-500 ms after the fact by piecing
together evidence from a variety of sources (Ballard et al.
1997; O’Regan & No¨e 2001). Various mechanisms and
cognitive architectures have been proposed to explain how
this narrative is constructed. For example, Minsky’s “Society of Mind” (1985), Baars’ “Global Workspace Theory”
(1988), Dennett’s “Multiple Drafts Model” (1991), and others, propose that consciousness arises from the interaction
of many simple cognitive modules that observe and control each other. The generally-linear stream of conscious
thought is constructed, typically in fragments, by these modules from each others’ outputs. Within this kind of architecture, trackers are the modules that interface between the
sensor stream and the symbolic cognitive modules.
A number of technical and scientific questions remain
to be answered about how the coherent conscious narrative is actually constructed from parallel and irregular
sources of input. Global Workspace Theory (Baars 1988;

2002) appears to be the current best detailed computational
model of this process.
In robotics, the Kalman Filter (Gelb 1974) is often used
to predict the most likely trajectory of a continuous dynamical system (along with its uncertainty), given a model and
an irregular collection of sensor observations (along with
their uncertainties). The technical methods are different, but
philosophically, the slightly retrospective construction of a
coherent sequential narrative from irregular observations is
no more problematical than a Kalman Filter.

Intentionality
My present visual perception, for example, could not
be the visual experience it is if it did not seem to me
that I was seeing chairs and tables in my immediate
vicinity. This feature, whereby many of my experiences
seem to refer to things beyond themselves, is the feature
that philosophers have come to label “intentionality”
(Searle 2004, p. 138).
The core of Searle’s “Chinese room” argument (Searle
1980) against strong AI is that it commits a category error with regard to intentionality. The mind necessarily has
intentionality (the ability to refer to objects in the world),
while computation (the manipulation of formal symbols according to syntactic rules) necessarily lacks intentionality.
Therefore, never the twain shall meet. QED.
However, intentionality is exactly what the tracker for a
high-level concept delivers: it binds a portion of the current sensor stream to the symbolic description of an object
(believed to be) in the external world. The relationship of
intentionality follows from the causal connection from the
external, physical world to the contents of the sensor stream,
and thence to the internal symbols created by the trackers.
Searle’s response to the “Robot Reply” (Searle 1980) acknowledges the importance of the causal connection between a robot’s sensorimotor system and the world, but he
claims that uninterpreted sensor and motor signals are just
as free of intentionality as any formal symbols.
Presumably, Searle would argue that the intentionality
provided by a tracker is merely “derived intentionality,”
coming from the mind of the human who programmed the
algorithms and control laws that make the tracker work.
This argument is vulnerable to a demonstration that effective
trackers can be learned automatically from experience with
uninterpreted sensors and effectors. In a preliminary form,
Pierce and Kuipers (1997) have made just such a demonstration.
A topological approach such as the Spatial Semantic Hierarchy (Kuipers 2000) to mapping an unknown environment depends on knowledge of hill-climbing and trajectoryfollowing control laws to define locally distinctive states and
link them into a topological map. The ability of a symbol to
refer to a distinctive state in the physical environment depends on the behaviors of the dynamical systems defined by
the control laws, not on intentionality in the pre-existing set
of symbols. Pierce and Kuipers (1997) showed that these
control laws could be learned from the dynamical regularities in the robot’s own experience with its uninterpreted sen-

sors and effectors, constrained by their causal connections
with the environment.
Assuming that learning methods like these can be extended to learn trackers for distinctive configurations in the
sensory stream, then new symbols can be defined to refer to whatever are the objects of those trackers. Experience over time accumulates observational axioms concerning these symbols, constraining the set of possible interpretations of its symbolic theory. Reference to those symbols
indirectly refers to the corresponding objects in the external
world, via the trackers and the sensorimotor streams. In this
way, the agent acquires intentionality of its own, not simply
derived from a human programmer.

The Distinction between the Center and the
Periphery
Some things are at the center of my conscious field, others are at the periphery. A good mark of this is that
one can shift one’s attention at will. I can focus my
attention on the glass of water in front of me, or on
the trees outside the window, without even altering my
position, and indeed without even moving my eyes. In
some sense, the conscious field remains the same, but I
focus on different features of it (Searle 2004, p. 140).
An individual tracker maintains a set of pointers into the
sensor input stream that defines the features it attends to.
The rest of the sensor stream is examined only enough to
continue to track successfully, and to allow “pop-out” detection.
Some trackers are within the agent’s focus of attention,
in which case they constitute the “figure” part of the “figureground” distinction in the visual field. Other “ground” trackers outside the current focus of attention may track objects
that could be attended to later, or they may contribute to
maintaining Situatedness (below).
Thermostats and robot vacuum cleaners are coupled with
the world to form simple dynamical systems. However, they
fail to be conscious because they have a single fixed “figure”,
no “ground” at all, and no ability to shift focus of attention.

Situatedness
All of our conscious experiences come to us with a
sense of what one might call the background situation
in which one experiences the conscious field. The sense
of one’s situation need not be, and generally is not, a
part of the conscious field. But, normally I am in some
sense cognizant of where I am on the surface of the
earth, what time of day it is, what time of year it is,
whether or not I have had lunch, what country I am a
citizen of, and so on with a range of features that I take
for granted as the situation in which my conscious field
finds itself (Searle 2004, p. 141).
While the concept of the tracker is particularly clear when
applied to images of objects that move within the visual
field, it applies equally well to tracking the location of the
robot within a given frame of reference, for example, the
current enclosing room. This concept of tracker can, in turn,
be generalized to track motion through an abstract space

such as time or a goal hierarchy. Such background situation trackers could potentially continue tracking with little
or no attention.

Active and Passive Consciousness
The basic distinction is this: in the case of perception
(seeing the glass in front of me, feeling the shirt against
my neck) one has the feeling, I am perceiving this, and
in that sense, this is happening to me. In the case of
action (raising my arm, walking across the room) one
has the feeling, I am doing this, and in that sense, I am
making this happen (Searle 2004, p. 142).

Þ

The agent’s sensorimotor interface (equations 7 and 11)
clearly divides into the sensor stream ´Øµ, which is happening to the agent, and the motor stream ´Øµ, by which the
agent makes things happen.
Active control of perception by moving the eyes to bring
a target into the fovea is accomodated by the current model,
since the state of the eyes would be part of the robot’s state
vector ´Øµ, and would be controlled by the motor vector ´Øµ. Attentional processes such as giving a particular
tracker more resources and allowing it to fill out its hierarchical structure more fully, could also be modeled as control
laws whose effect is on the internal state ´Øµ of the agent.

Ù

Ù

Ü

Ñ

The Gestalt Structure
We do not, for example, in normal vision see undifferentiated blurs and fragments; rather, we see tables,
chairs, people, cars, etc., even though only fragments
of those objects are reflecting photons at the retina,
and the retinal image is in various ways distorted. The
Gestalt psychologists investigated these structures and
found certain interesting facts. One is, the brain has a
capacity to take degenerate stimuli and organize them
into coherent wholes. Furthermore, it is able to take a
constant stimulus and treat it now as one perception,
now as another (Searle 2004, p. 143).
Each tracker looks for a certain structure in the sensor
stream. When it finds it, that structure is foreground for that
tracker, and the rest of the sensor stream is background. The
findings of the Gestalt psychologists provide clues about the
properties of individual trackers, of the process by which
potential trackers are instantiated and become active, of the
ensemble of active trackers, and perhaps even of the learning process by which trackers for new types of objects are
learned.
For example, interpretation-flipping figures such as the
Necker cube or the duck/rabbit figure suggest properties of
the ensemble of active trackers, such as mutual exclusion
and continued competition among the higher level of hierarchical trackers, while lower levels preserve their bindings
and can be used by either competing interpretation.

Mood
All of my conscious states come to me in some sort of
mood or other. . . . there is what one might call a certain
flavor to consciousness, a certain tone to one’s conscious experiences (Searle 2004, p. 139).

Ü

Þ

The relation between a human agent’s psychochemical
state (a component of ´Øµ), mood (a component of ´Øµ),
and the rest of the agent’s perception, is presumably embedded in the complex and unknown functions and . How
mood affects behavior is embedded (in part) in the mechanism for selecting the next control law À .

Pleasure/Unpleasure
Related to, but not identical with, mood is the phenomenon that for any conscious state there is some degree of pleasure or unpleasure. Or rather, one might
say, there is some position on a scale that includes the
ordinary notions of pleasure and unpleasure (Searle
2004, p. 141).
The pleasure/unpleasure scale has a natural role as a reward signal during reinforcement learning. The links between particular qualia and their positions on the pleasure/unpleasure scale are very likely determined by evolutionary learning (Dennett 1991). For example, pain is unpleasant and sex is pleasant because of their functional roles
in the survival of the individual and the species.

The Sense of Self
It is typical of normal conscious experiences that I have
a certain sense of who I am, a sense of myself as a self
(Searle 2004, p. 144).
In many ways, the most pragmatically useful aspect of
consciousness is the ability to observe, describe, store,
recall, reflect on, and in some ways control one’s own
thoughts, experiences, goals, plans, and beliefs.
As we have seen, the apparently sequential and continuous nature of conscious experience is the post-hoc construction of a plausible coherent narrative to explain a somewhat
irregular collection of sensory inputs.
Once such a narrative exists, even in fragments, it can be
stored in long-term memory, recalled, and reasoned about
like any other piece of symbolic knowledge. There is nothing about the construction, storage, recall, or manipulation
of this kind of knowledge that poses fundamental difficulties
for computational modeling (Minsky 1968).
It is important to acknowledge that memory can store
more than highly abstracted symbolic descriptions of experience. While it is impossible to store the entire sensory
stream, it is certainly possible to store qualia of various
kinds: snapshots or fragments of the sensory stream with
high information content. Such memories are completely
specific to the agent whose sensors and experiences give rise
to the qualia that are stored. The qualia themselves, and the
associations they provide into the agent’s long-term memory, certainly contribute to a unique “sense of self.”2

Discussion
The claim presented here (a “strong AI” claim) is that
the conditions for consciousness are expressible as a computational model, including dynamical trackers maintaining symbolic references to perceptual images in the sensor
2
“What do you see when you turn out the light? I can’t tell you,
but I know it’s mine.” – John Lennon.

stream. The phenomenal character of consciousness (“what
it is like”) comes from the enormous flow of information in
the sensory stream, and from the turbulent “churn” of process activation, on the way to being serialized as conscious
thought (Baars 1988).
Qualia come from the information density of the sensor
stream. Trackers ground a symbolic knowledge representation in the “firehose of experience” and constrain its interpretations. Intrinsic intentionality exists if useful trackers
can be learned from uninterpreted experience. And the sequential stream of subjective consciousness is a plausible,
coherent narrative, constructed retrospectively (by 500 ms
or so) from the activation of many parallel unconscious processes.
The empirical and philosophical study of consciousness
in humans helps clarify the nature of the phenomenon. The
study of the brain helps clarify the nature of the one implementation of these computational processes in whose existence we have confidence. But according to our claim,
consciousness is not restricted to biological implementation.
The essential features of consciousness can, in principle, be
implemented on a robot with sufficient computational power
and a sufficiently rich sensorimotor system, embodied and
embedded in its environment.

References
Agre, P. E., and Chapman, D. 1987. Pengi: An implementation of a theory of activity. In Proc. 6th National Conf.
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-87). Morgan Kaufmann.
Baars, B. J. 1988. A Cognitive Theory of Consciousness.
Cambridge University Press.
Baars, B. J. 2002. The conscious access hypothesis: origins
and recent evidence. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 6(1):47–
52.
Ballard, D. H.; Hayhoe, M. M.; Pook, P. K.; and Rao, R.
P. N. 1997. Deictic codes for the embodiment of cognition.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 20(4):723–767.
Ballard, D.; Hayhoe, M.; and Pelz, J. 1995. Memory representations in natural tasks. Cognitive Neuroscience 7:66–
80.
Blake, A., and Yuille, A. 1992. Active Vision. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Coradeschi, S., and Saffiotti, A. 2003. An introduction to
the anchoring problem. Robotics and Autonomous Systems
43(2-3):85–96.
Crick, F., and Koch, C. 2003. A framework for consciousness. Nature Neuroscience 6(2):119–126.
Damasio, A. 1999. The Feeling of What Happens. Harcourt, Inc.
Dennett, D. 1991. Consciousness Explained. Little, Brown
& Co.
Gelb, A. 1974. Applied Optimal Estimation. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Hutchinson, S.; Hager, G. D.; and Corke, P. I. 1996. A
tutorial on visual servo control. IEEE Trans. on Robotics
and Automation 12(5):651–670.

Kahneman, D., and Treisman, A. 1992. The reviewing
of object files: object-specific integration of information.
Cognitive Psychology 24:175–219.
Koch, C. 2003. The Quest for Consciousness: A Neurobiological Approach. Englewood CO: Roberts & Company
Publisher.
Kuipers, B. 2000. The Spatial Semantic Hierarchy. Artificial Intelligence 119:191–233.
Marr, D., and Nishihara, H. K. 1978. Representation and
recognition of the spatial organization of three-dimensional
shapes. Proceedings of the Royal Society B 200:269–294.
Minsky, M. L. 1968. Matter, mind, and models. In Minsky, M., ed., Semantic Information Processing. MIT Press.
425–432.
Minsky, M. 1975. A framework for representing knowledge. In Winston, P. H., ed., The Psychology of Computer
Vision. NY: McGraw-Hill.
Minsky, M. 1985. The Society of Mind. NY: Simon and
Schuster.
O’Regan, J. K., and No¨e, A. 2001. A sensorimotor account
of vision and visual consciousness. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 24(5):939–1011.
Philipona, D.; O’Regan, J. K.; and Nadal, J.-P. 2003. Is
there something out there? Inferring space from sensorimotor dependencies. Neural Computation 15:2029–2049.
Pierce, D. M., and Kuipers, B. J. 1997. Map learning with
uninterpreted sensors and effectors. Artificial Intelligence
92:169–227.
Pylyshyn, Z. W. 1989. The role of location indexes in spatial perception: A sketch of the FINST spatial-index model.
Cognition 32:65–97.
Quine, W. V. O. 1961. Two dogmas of empiricism. In
Quine, W. V. O., ed., From a Logical Point of View. Harvard
University Press, second, revised edition.
Sacks, O. 1985. The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat
and Other Clinical Tales. Simon & Schuster.
Searle, J. 1980. Minds, brains, and programs. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences 3:417–424.
Searle, J. R. 2004. Mind: A Brief Introduction. Oxford
University Press.
Shanahan, M. 2005. Perception as abduction: turning sensor data into meaningful representation. Cognitive Science
29:103–134.
Turing, A. M. 1950. Computing machinery and intelligence. Mind 59:433–460.
Ullman, S. 1984. Visual routines. Cognition 18:97–157.
Wiener, N. 1948. Cybernetics or Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine. Cambridge MA: MIT
Press.

