International Journal of Advances in Engineering Research

http://www.ijaer.com

(IJAER) 2014, Vol. No. 8, Issue No. VI, December

ISSN: 2231-5152

ACCIDENT SURVEILANCE USING ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE INSIDE MINI QUADCOPTER
S.RAHUL1st¸

DR R.MANOHARAN.2nd, DR R.GANESHAN.3rd, N.S.VISHAL.4h
Student cse1st &4th
Professor 2nd
Saveetha school of engineering 1,2&4
Principal, srivenkateshwara college of engineering 3rd

ABSTRACT
The aim of this work is to implement artificial intelligence and image processing to find and locate
accident zones within particular perimeter using a mini quad copter, through Global System for
Mobile communication GSM transmission if any accidents founded in any area within the perimeter.
Then the sensor send the signal and then the area will be located spotted through global position
system GPS maps and the latitude and longitudes will be designated and the particular address and
landmarks will be refined and send to the nearby police station and hospital. Then police will arrive
to that place and solve the problem.
KEYWORDS:GSM transmission, GSM maps, artificial intelligence, mini quad copter,police station,
hospital, image processing

INTRODUCTION
Accidents on the road sides specially on the highways happens frequently. Accidents leads
too many problem mainly traffic issues. If any person injured the information to the hospital
to be headed after the short interval of time to avoid these issue we are going to implement
camera, GPS mapping , GSM transmitter, image processing inside a mini quad copter which
is controlled by an microprocessor using artificial intelligence. This quad copter revolves
around the perimeter which is sited as instruction which is fed into a microprocessor. If any
accident happened the quad copter will locate the accident sport using GSM map and the
latitude and longitude will be converted to address information is send to computer. The quad
copter will arrive to that place and send the signal to the computer then the will send the
signal to the nearby police station and hospital. To overcome traffic we are using a signal to
stop the traffic if accident happens then the signal will deflect the signal and changes the
signal to red then there will be no traffic. Then the police will arrive to that place and clear
the traffic and solve the problem and it will send into nearby hospital and the doctor will see
the injured person. In this the quad copter consists of camera, GSM transmitter and GSM
mapping, proximity sensor,Ir sensor microprocessor. . From the invention of vehicles till
today many improvement in the field of automobiles had been happened. But till now,
accidents through these vehicles is obvious. It causes many problems like lives recurring
medical help and police help to clear the traffic and further problems which will be caused to
an accident. This will help the society. In this we are using many miniature quad copter.
43

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF ADVANCES IN ENGINEERING RESEARCH

International Journal of Advances in Engineering Research

http://www.ijaer.com

(IJAER) 2014, Vol. No. 8, Issue No. VI, December

ISSN: 2231-5152

REVIEW OF LITERATURE
In this paper work we are going to implementation of artificial intelligence to find and locate
accidents zones within the particular perimeter. Using the mini quad copter through GSM
transmission if any accident founded in any area especially in highway roads it send the
signal to the nearby police station and hospital.
In this we are using only
1) Driving module
2) Video camera
3) GSM transmitter
4) Proximity sensor
5) Microprocessor
6) GPS mapping
In the receiver side we are using
1) Pc
2) GPS receiver

DESCRIPTION ABOUT THE COMPONENT:
In the video camera technique it should be a high resolution
In the proximity sensor emits an electromagnetic field the object being sensed is often
referred to as proximity sensor target.
In the GSM transmitter it transmit the signal what is happening and it will connected to the
GSM receiver and this will connected to the pc.
In the microprocessor it controlled by the logic of almost all digital devices, from the clock
radios to fuel-injection systems for automobiles.
In the GPS map is used to say where the accident is happening with latitude and longitude.so
the police will come soon
In the receiver side
In the GSM receiver it will receive the signal from the transmitter and send it to the pc.
In the pc only all things are going if any accident happens it will detect and give an alarm.
Then the police will go and solve it.

ALGORITHM
Step1: Implementation of artificial intelligence inside mini quad copter
Step2: In the mini quad copter it consists of
1. Driving module
2. Video camera
3. GSM transmitter
4. Micro processor
44

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF ADVANCES IN ENGINEERING RESEARCH

International Journal of Advances in Engineering Research

http://www.ijaer.com

(IJAER) 2014, Vol. No. 8, Issue No. VI, December

ISSN: 2231-5152

5. Proximity sensor
6. GPS mapping
Step 3: in the receiver side consists of
1: GSM receiver
2: Pc
Step4: The first three in the mini quad copter are places inside the microprocessor and also it
holds proximity and GPS mapping.
Step 5: If there is the accident happens it will send the signal to the pc and also the nearby
police station and hospital it will help the society.

METHODOLOGY
From the invention of vehicles till today many improvement in the field of automobiles had
been happened. But till now, accidents through these vehicles is obvious. It causes many
problems like lives recurring medical help and police help to clear the traffic and further
problems which will be caused to an accident. This will help the society . To overcome all
these problems we are going to involve a quad copter in road sides specially highways roads.
This quad copter is used for survilence purpose to find out the accidents on roads . It is
programmed in such a way that when a vehicle is stayed in static for few minutes it is viewed
by camera if the quad copter will send message to nearby police station to identify whether it
is accident or not. In police station the cops will monitor after the alarm has been received
this will check the status if accident are found the let the quad to send the signal to nearby
hospital and to the police will available there to control traffic and remove The vehicles
which had met accident. It will find with the help of the image processing it will check and
compare with the orginal design if any damages happen means the quad copter will see
whether it is a accident or not.All transmission is done through GSM transmission technique.
The quad copter is programmed to fly only for a particular perimeter. which will be makes
through GPS mappings. If accidents found the lattitude and longitude of it specified it is fine
timed as rear and send to the police station and hospital The device module is same as
ordinary mini quad mode. Changes in hardware of it .It is designed in such a way that it
cannot be attacked by external factors like rain, heavy wind, storms, etc…if any accident
happens the signal in that perimeter all the traffic signal will changes to red. This will reduces
the traffic and this will also help the public also.In this IR sensor is used and it is placed in
the road with in the perimeter if any accident happens this sensor will senses and it will send
the send the signal to the quad copter from the quad copter the signal is in to the GSM
receiver from there to the pc which is nothing but the system where the
user will see whether it is an accident or not. He find whether it is accident or not with help of
image processinghe will compare the original signal and damage image then it will find
easily. The it send the information to the policestation

45

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF ADVANCES IN ENGINEERING RESEARCH

International Journal of Advances in Engineering Research

http://www.ijaer.com

(IJAER) 2014, Vol. No. 8, Issue No. VI, December

ISSN: 2231-5152

BLOCK DIAGRAM

Driving

Video
camera
GSM

module

transmitter

IR

Micro processor

Image
processing

sensor

GPS
Mapping

RECEIVER SIDE

GSM

Pc

receiver

46

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF ADVANCES IN ENGINEERING RESEARCH

International Journal of Advances in Engineering Research

http://www.ijaer.com

(IJAER) 2014, Vol. No. 8, Issue No. VI, December

ISSN: 2231-5152

DESCRIPTION ABOUT BLOCK DIAGRAM
1 MICROPROCESSOR:
In the microprocessor it controlled by the logic of almost all digital devices, from the clock
radios to fuel-injection systems for automobiles A microprocessor incorporates the functions
of a computer's central processing unit(CPU) on a single integrated circuit (IC), or at most a
few integrated circuits. All modern CPUs are microprocessors making the micro- prefix
redundant. The microprocessor is a multipurpose, programmable device that accepts digital
data as input, processes it according to instructions stored in its memory, and provides results
as output. It is an example of sequential digital logic, as it has internal memory.
Microprocessors operate on numbers and
symbols represented in the binary numeral system. The microprocessor is consist of image
processing , driving module, video camera GSM transmitter.

2GSM TRANSMITTER:
The GSM transmitter it will transmit the signal and it will connected to the GSM receiver and
this will connected to the pc measurements determine the link quality seen by the user in
Question :
Phase error and mean frequency error
Mean transmitted RF carrier power
Transmitted RF carrier power versus time
Out-of-channel measurements determine how much interference the user
causes other GSM users:
Spectrum due to modulation and wideband noise
Spectrum due to switching
Tx and Rx band spurious
Out-of-band measurements determine how much interference the user
causes other users of the radio spectrum (hospital, police station):
3 GPS RECEIVER:
In the GSM receiver it will receive the signal from the transmitter and send it to the pc.
Performance is critical in the following area sensitivity. Sensitivity measurements determine
the link quality seen by the user in low signal level conditions. The GSM is one manager
factor which plays a vital role in the accident surveilance of mini quad copter.
4 GPS MAPPING :
The Global Positioning System (GPS) is one of the space-based satellite navigation system
which provides location and time information in all weather conditions, anywhere on or near
the Earth where there is an unobstructed line of sight to four or more GPS satellites. It
provides critical capabilities to military, civil and commercial users around the world. In the
47

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF ADVANCES IN ENGINEERING RESEARCH

International Journal of Advances in Engineering Research

http://www.ijaer.com

(IJAER) 2014, Vol. No. 8, Issue No. VI, December

ISSN: 2231-5152

GPS map is used to say where the accident is happening with latitude and longitude.so the
police will come soon and then the information is send in to nearby mapping
5 IR sensor:
It is possible to have a sensor that can return the value of the reflected light. This type of
sensor can then be used to measure the "bright" object . IR Sensors work by using a specific
light sensor to detect a select light wavelength in the Infra-Red (IR) spectrum. By using an
LED which produces light at the same wavelength as what the sensor is looking for, you can
look at the intensity of the received light. When an object is close to the sensor, the light from
the LED bounces off the object and into the light sensor. This results in a large jump in the
intensity, which we already know can be detected using a threshold.
6 Image processing:
In imaging science, image processing is a form of signal processing where the input is an
image. The output of image processing may be either an image or a set of characteristics or
parameters related to the image. Most image-processing techniques involve treating the
image as a two-dimensional signal and applying standard signal-processing techniques to
it.Image processing usually refers to digital image processing, but optical and analog image
processing also are possible. This article is about general techniques that apply to all of them.
The acquisition of images (producing the input image in the first place) is referred to as
imaging.

FINDINGS
It is very useful for society. If any accidents happens the quad copter will send the
information to the GSM transmitter and GPS mapping this signals send to the nearby police
station and hospital. Then the police squad will come and solve the traffic and it will help the
people. Then the injured person will take into nearby hospital. This accident found with the
help of latitude and longitude of it specified it is finely tuned as rear and send to police station
and hospitals by the help of artificial intelligence. This will also reduce the traffic also with
the help of traffic signals is changed into red if the accident happens.

DISCUSSION
In the accident survilence we are going to discuss about how it is working and review of what
is that paper is all about. The accident survilence is basically based on the artificial
intelligence inside of the that the we are going to keep the quad copter this quad copter will
send the accident signal to the nearby police station and hospital. The quad copter consists of
eight instruments such as
1. Driving module
2. Video camera
48

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF ADVANCES IN ENGINEERING RESEARCH

International Journal of Advances in Engineering Research

http://www.ijaer.com

(IJAER) 2014, Vol. No. 8, Issue No. VI, December

ISSN: 2231-5152

3. GSM transmitter
4. Microprocessor
5. IR sensor
6. GPS mapping system
7. GSM receiver
8. Pc
9. image processing

CONCLUSION
In this paper, the issuesof accident surveilance using artificial intelligence inside mini quad
copter has been discussed. In this we discussed about the GSM transmitter, GSM mapping,
and artificial intelligence. If there is accident happens the police will arrive and solve the
problem. Thus the study gives focus for our future towards advanced learning based
algorithms for accident survilance using artificial intelligence. From this it will surely help
the society and reduce the traffic also. This is mainly used for public society only.

REFERENCE
1. Dept. of Mech. Eng., Korea Univ. of Technol. & Educ., Cheonan, South Korea(“Quad
copter design and implementation as a multidisciplinary”)
2. DiCesare . "Design optimization of a quad-rotor capable of autonomous flight," Major
qualifying project Report, Worcester Polytechnic Inst., Worcester, MA, 2008.
3. Gronowski. Digital Equipment Corp., Hudson, MA, USA Bowhill, W.J. ; Preston, R.P. ;
GOWAN M.K.; ALLMON R.L.
4. D. Dobberpuhl, et al., "A 200 MHz 64 b dual-issue CMOS microprocessor", IEEE J. SolidState Circuits, vol. 27, pp.106 -107 1992
5. Zhenhai Chen Rockwell Autom Chelmsford, MA, USA Luo R.C. (“Design and
implementation of capacitive proximity sensor using micro electromechanical systems
technology”)
6. M. Huang, C. G. Xie, R. Thorn, D. Snowden, and M. S. Beck, "Design of sensor
electronics for electrical capacitance tomography", Proc. Inst. Elect. Eng., vol. 139, no. 1,
pp.83 -88 1992
7. Wong, C.S. Mixed Signal Dev., LSI Logic Corp., Milpitas, CA, USA(“A 3-V GSM
baseband transmitter”)

49

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF ADVANCES IN ENGINEERING RESEARCH

International Journal of Advances in Engineering Research

http://www.ijaer.com

(IJAER) 2014, Vol. No. 8, Issue No. VI, December

ISSN: 2231-5152

8.Xun Cao Xin Tong ; Qionghai Dai ; lic(“ High resolution multispectral video capture with a
hybrid camera system”)
9.Wong, C.S. Mixed Signal Dev., LSI Logic Corp., Milpitas, CA, USA(“A 3-V GSM
baseband transmitter”)
10.P. Minogue, "A 3 V GSM codec", IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 30, pp.1411 -1420
1995
11. O'Leary, D.E. Univ. of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA (“Artificial
Intelligence and Big Data”)
12,.

M.

Cox

and

D.

Ellsworth,

&ldquo,Managing

Big

Data

for

Scientific

Visualization,&rdquo, Proc. ACM Siggraph, ACM, 1997, pp. 5-1&ndash,5-17.
13.

M.

Cox

and

D.

Ellsworth,

&ldquo

Managing

Big

Data

for

Scientific

Visualization,&rdquo, Proc. ACM Siggraph, ACM, 1997, pp. 5-1&ndash,5-17. (“Real-Time
Automatic Traffic Accident Recognition Using HFG”)
14. M. J. Cassidy, S. B. Anani and J. M. Haigwood, Study of freeway traffic near an offramp, Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, Vol. 36, No. 6, pp. 563-572,
2002.

50

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF ADVANCES IN ENGINEERING RESEARCH

