International Journal of Computer Theory and Engineering, Vol. 7, No. 6, December 2015

Artificial Intelligence in Personalized Medicine
Application of AI Algorithms in Solving Personalized
Medicine Problems
Jamilu Awwalu, Ali Garba Garba, Anahita Ghazvini, and Rose Atuah


This is accomplished with the help of genetic information,
which is used as part of the baseline data in tailoring or
customizing medical treatment or administration. But the
majority of replicable findings do not pinpoint common
genes underlying susceptibility or protection from disease;
instead, current understanding centers primarily on rare
genetic variants, although a number of common variants have
furthered understanding as well.
The field of medicine has significantly grown over the
years and emphasis is put on considering the possibility of
preventing diseases by the use of modern technologies to find
out the possibility of person having a disease and giving the
person treatments (maybe drugs) to control the occurrence of
the foreseen disease. Also with the use of technology, clinical
personnel (i.e. doctors & pharmacist) can deliver a very much
efficient healthcare service as opposed to traditional
techniques [3].
The use of Artificial Intelligence techniques in setting up
or building personalized medicine is important in terms of
precision and accuracy of disease discovery, treatment, and
drug administration. The control of adverse drug reactions
and enzymes metabolism which results in some people
having issues eliminating drugs from their bodies, hence
leading to overdose; while others eliminate the drug from the
body before it gets the chance to work [4]. The use of
computers in hospitals and clinics to record medical activities
or use of electronic health record (EHR) systems nowadays
provides medical knowledge and data that can be used as a
benchmark to enhance medical service delivery.

Abstract—Artificial Intelligence has significantly gained
grounds in our daily livelihood in this age of information and
technology. As with any field of study, evolution takes place in
terms of breakthrough or developmental research leading to
advancement and friendly usability of that specific technology.
Problems from different areas have been successfully solved
using Artificial Intelligence algorithms. In order to use AI
algorithms in solving Personalized Medicine problems such as;
disease detection or prediction, accurate disease diagnosis, and
treatment optimization, the choice of the algorithm influenced
by its ability and applicability matters. This paper reviews the
application and ability of artificial neural network (ANN),
support vector machines (SVM), Naïve Bayes, and fuzzy logic in
solving personalized medicine problems, and shows that the
obtained results meet expectations. Also, the achievement from
the previous studies encourages developers and researchers to
use these algorithms in solving Medical and Personalized
Medicine problems.
Index Terms—Personalized medicine, artificial neural
networks, support vector machines, Naive Bayesian.

I. INTRODUCTION
It is always a surprising problem seeing a drug work for
some people and be less effective on others, or causing side
effects in another. Another problem is the question of why
some people develop some diseases e.g. cancers, while others
do not. Genetic make-up and other differential factors such as
age; lifestyle could be reasons for these problems. As such,
[1] believes medicine should approach each patient‟s illness
as unique, with medication tailored to the person‟s history
and biology. This approach to medical practice is known as
Personalized or Precision Medicine.
Patients with same diagnostics result must not be treated
the same way; they can receive different treatment in order to
achieve efficient treatment as illustrated in Fig. 1.
Personalized medicine as a branch or extension of Medical
Sciences uses practice and medical decisions to deliver
customized healthcare service to patients. The major role of
personalized medicine as posited by [2] is to predict the
possibility of an individual developing a disease, achieve
accurate diagnosis, and optimize the best treatment available.

Fig. 1. Diagnosis and treatment of patients group [5].


Manuscript received May 12, 2014; revised September 11, 2014.
Jamilu Awwalu is with the Faculty of Computer Science and IT, Baze
University Abuja, Nigeria (email: Jamilu.awwalu@bazeuniversity.edu.ng).
Ali Garba Garba, Anahita Ghazvini, and Rose Atuah are with the Faculty
of Information Science and Technology, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia,
43600 Bangi, Selangor Darul Ihsan, Malaysia (e-mail: {aligarba, P72674,
roseatuah}@siswa.ukm.edu.my).

DOI: 10.7763/IJCTE.2015.V7.999

II. AI ALGORITHMS USED IN PERSONALIZED MEDICINE
There are number of algorithms from Machine Learning
and Artificial Intelligence that are used in the Medical Field,
and in specific Personalized Medicine. Some of these
439

International Journal of Computer Theory and Engineering, Vol. 7, No. 6, December 2015

a bigger picture can be looked at from different perspectives
as reported by [11] are; government laws and regulations on
public medical data and genetic research, healthcare workers
attitudes, awareness and education, IT implementation, and
financial issues. However, the focus of this paper is on IT
implementation problems, and the problems considered as
shown in Fig. 2 are disease detection or prediction,
achievement of accurate diagnosis, and optimal treatment.

algorithms are discussed here.
A. Naï
ve Bayesian
Naï
ve Bayesian (NB) algorithm named after Thomas
Bayes (1702- 1761) who proposed the algorithm is based on
probabilistic model and allows the capture of uncertainty in a
model in a principled way through determining the
probabilities of different outcomes. NB is widely used today
in different systems that ranges from spam filtering,
recommender systems, and text classification. It is also used
in medical applications, and weather forecast. This makes it a
good algorithm for classification and prediction as well.
Some of the advantages of NB are; it is robust for noise in
input data, requires a small amount of training data. Some of
the disadvantages of NB as mentioned by [6] are; loss of
accuracy as a result of class conditional independence cause
by assumption. And some disadvantages of Naï
ve Bayes,
includes; where a predictor is not available from the training
data, NB assumes that the record with the new predictor
category has zero probability.

Fig. 2. Problems in personalized medicine.

IV. APPLICATION OF AI TECHNIQUES TO SOLVE THE
PROBLEMS

B. Artificial Neural Network
The application of ANNs in medicine includes, but not
limited to the diagnosis, imaging, back pain, dementia,
pathology and prognosis evaluation of appendicitis,
myocardial infarction, acute pulmonary embolism
arrhythmias, or psychiatric disorders diseases, [7] as stated
by [8].
Some of the advantages of ANN as stated by [8] are:
Neural networks can learn linear and non linear models. Also
the accuracy of models created by neural network can be
measured statistically. Incomplete data and noise are
tolerable by neural network. Neural networks models are
flexible because they can be updated, hence making it
suitable for dynamic environment such as health sector.
ANNs are black box algorithms, hence weak in providing
insight into its structure. Also, although it is able to
generalize from a set of examples, if it sees only cases of a
certain range; it predictions outside these range could be
completely invalid [6].

The problems mentioned in Fig. 2 are sequentially
discussed in the subsequent sections with regards to how AI
algorithms are employed by researchers to solve the
problems.
A. Detection/Prediction
The solution to detection or prediction of disease is
important for the solving of the next two (i.e. diagnosis and
treatment) problems. In this section Artificial Intelligence
algorithms from machine learning are reviewed with respect
to how the problem of disease detection or prediction is
solved.
1) Support vector machines (SVM)
In a study by [8], SVM was used to classify and detect fall
types. The study was relevant because, falling as accident
especially in the elderly aged members of the society has to
be prevented; but before it can be prevented; it has to be
detected and classified. Five different classifiers were used in
the research, but SVM was one of two that achieved 99%
accuracy.
Also, [12] used SVM to detect the accuracy of cardiac
monitoring devices. The generic systems for monitoring
cardiac arrests lacks the ability to differentiate between
artifacts and true events across a range of individuals because
they are trained just on a general population level. So, they
used SVM to refine and achieve a more accurate patient
specific result by making use of population level prior
knowledge for initial model creation, then refining further by
selectively interacting with human experts to get examples
from a new patient until a stopping condition is met. The
result from their study shows that patient specificity
improves the Atrial Fabrillation (AF) of detection and the
poor specificity of the generic detector.

C. Support Vector Machines (SVM)
SVM has advantages, and as mentioned by[9] they are:
SVM produces accurate result classification result on
theoretical basis, even when input data are non-linearly
separable. Also, the accuracy result does not rely on the
quality of human expertise judgment for choice of the
linearization function for non linear input data.
A disadvantage of SVM as a non-parametric technique
mentioned by [9] is its lack for transparency for results. The
biggest limitation as mentioned by [10] is that which lies in
the choice of the kernel. It has to be set correctly to achieve
an accurate result for any given task or problem. Kernel
choice that produces accurate results for task „A‟ may
produce poor results for task „B‟.

2) Fuzzy logic
Case Based Fuzzy Cognitive Map (CBFCM) is an
extension of fuzzy cognitive maps that is used for
classification and prediction. CBFCM works by representing

III. PROBLEMS IN PERSONALIZED MEDICINE
The problems in personalized medicine vary and can be
dependent on a disease type or nature. Overall problems from
440

International Journal of Computer Theory and Engineering, Vol. 7, No. 6, December 2015

the causal relationship between different concepts and then
analyzing inference patterns. This is applied in personalized
medicine by analyzing the relationship between different
nature of diseases and patient specific information e.g. gene,
blood pressure, and blood type to infer a pattern match in the
approach to disease detection in a patient.
A research by [3] on Genomic and Personalized Medicine
for classification as a means of disease detection in the
Decision Support System they developed. For each patient,
they used three parameters (C1, C2, and C3) as input values
which could be Clinical signs, genetic information, age or
biological results. Fuzzy rules were then applied on the
concepts. If there is a good similarity between known cases
and patient a conclusion is drawn, else an FCM is used for
diagnosis and therapeutic decision.
In a related work by [13], Fuzzy logic was used to detect
heart disease using 6 input fields (chest pain, blood pressure,
cholesterol, blood sugar, maximum heart rate, old peak) and
2 output fields (result, and precautions) with rule base that
consist 22 rules. The output detects the presence of heart
disease and precautions accordingly. And the observed result
was 92% accurate.

problems, and different forms of cancer by analyzing
diagnostic criteria and spectral information. The application
of ANN in medical diagnostics varies; one of the ways the
ANN is applied as stated by [15] is shown in Fig. 3.

3) Artificial neural network (ANN)
In a study by [14] neural networks and decision tree were
used to develop a patient specific real time alarm algorithms.
They observed that alarms are built retrospectively by dataset
that encompass thousands of patients to detect adverse
clinical and medical conditions. But without further
improvement, studies found that a model built from one
patient population has worse performance on data from other
two populations. So, their research explores building
patient-specific alarming models from a specific individual
models data. Of the two algorithms employed in the research
(Decision Tree and Neural Network), Neural Network was
recommended because it has a higher accuracy rate (96%,
99%, 79%, and 99%). However, the result from Decision
Tree (84%, 98%, 72%, and 98%) was not so bad, just that it
was not good enough compared to the ones from neural
networks.
Data from 11 different patients of various ages was
collected from 196 hours. And neural network of single
output layer with one hidden layer was used with two
different training times i.e. 2 and 8 hours. Although the
performance of the 2 hours trained network was poor, the 8
hours trained network was considered very well because it
outperforms the generic alarm algorithms in devices.

In a research by [16], ANN was applied to diagnose kidney
stones. The research was conducted on a dataset that consist
1000 patients records, and 7 attributes that were the actual
symptoms of kidney stones. The research compared three
neural network algorithms i.e. Radial Basis Function (RBF),
Learning Vector Quantization (LVQ), and Multilayer
Perceptron (MLP) with back propagation. Also, WEKA was
used as a tool, with 70% training, 15% testing, and 15%
validation.
The result shows MLP outperforms the other algorithms
with an accuracy of 92% and correctly classified instances of
922, and incorrectly classified instances of 23.

Fig. 3. Fundamental steps in ANN-based medical diagnostic[15].

2) Expert systems
A rule based Expert System was developed by [17] that
produces relevant data and information for consultations,
results, and possible diagnosis. Their research was scoped to
Malaria, chicken pox, diarrhea, diabetics, cholera, asthma,
jaundice, hepatitis, typhoid, thyroid, migraine, scatia,
bronchitis, and Alzheimer‟s disease.
Also, [18] developed a rule based expert system that makes
inference with symbols that require the translation of a
specific knowledge in standard symbolic form. Data was
collected that associate patients with sign/symptoms and
diseases. The symptoms are organized in groups and the
outcome is categorized into a suggestion, suspicion, or
suspension of diagnostic ideas to the user (doctor).

B. Achievement of Accurate Diagnosis
The importance of accurate diagnosis need not be
overemphasized in the medical field, because improper or
wrong diagnosis results in serious implications for health
outcome. This problem varies from over-diagnosis to
under-diagnosis resulting in the next problem to be discussed
later in this paper i.e. treatment optimization. However, the
AI algorithms used to address this problem i.e. achieving
accurate diagnosis, are discussed in this section.

3) Support vector machine (SVM)
In a related research, [19] implemented and intelligent
system based support vector machine and Radial Basis
Function (RBF) type of Artificial Neural Network (ANN) to
diagnose heart disease. However, SVM was proposed
because it produced a better result (86.42%) compared to
RBF (80.81%). A total medical record of 214 instances
consisting 19 attributes and 4 class distribution were used.
Binary classification was used in which 78 instances belong
to the class „0‟ i.e. Myalgia meaning normal, while 139 are
considered patients with heart problems.

1) Artificial neural network (ANN)
Several studies show the ability of ANN to accurately
diagnose some diseases e.g. malignant melanoma, eye
441

International Journal of Computer Theory and Engineering, Vol. 7, No. 6, December 2015

future trends include:
Preventive Medicine: Preventive Medicine is a future
trend related to personalized medicine. It is envisioned that,
sooner or later, every inanimate object will be able to
recognize your genetic code—including that taunting
vending machine in your office, which may or may not
advise you to skip the chocolate bar today, so that you can
skip diabetes tomorrow [5].
Robotic Surgery: Researchers are currently working on
developing robots that could perfectly perform surgery on
humans. Robotic surgery such as da Vinci® help enables
surgeons operate with enhanced vision, precision, dexterity,
and control. Also, the use of robotic surgery remotely is
envisioned in the new future; especially to carry out surgery
on Astronauts. A fist-sized robot is scheduled for its first
zero-gravity test in the next several months—one small step
toward enabling robotic medical attention for humans stuck
on deep-space missions lasting for months, [23]. Also, the
use injected micro chips to perform surgical or organ
correctional operations are envisioned instead of cutting out
the human body.

C. Treatment Optimization
1) Artificial neural network (ANN)
Several studies have been conducted to predict the clinical
course of Graves Disease (GD) in patients treated with
Antithyroid drugs. [20] Studied the clinical outcome of GD
after Antithyroid therapy by defining a set of easily
achievable variables able to predict, as early as possible. The
study contained 71 patients with GD treated with
Methimazole for 18 months: 27 of them achieved stable
remission for at least 2 years after Methimazole therapy
withdrawal, whereas 44 patients relapsed. Then, at first used
Perceptron-like artificial neural network (ANN) to predict
remission or relapse after Methimazole withdrawal.
Twenty-seven variables obtained at diagnosis or during
treatment were considered. Among different combinations,
they identified an optimal set of seven variables available at
the time of diagnosis, whose combination was useful to
efficiently predict the outcome of the disease following
therapy withdrawal in approximately 80% of cases. This set
consists of the following variables: heart rate, presence of
thyroid bruits, psychological symptoms requiring
psychotropic drugs, serum TGAb and fT4 levels at
presentation, thyroid-ultrasonography findings and cigarette
smoking. Finally, they concluded that perceptron-like ANN
is potentially a useful approach for GD-management in
choosing the most appropriate therapy schedule at the time of
diagnosis.

VI. CONCLUSION
The implementation of Personalized Medicine heavily
relies on AI algorithms as discussed in this review. However,
it is still in its early stage and levels and faces some
challenges; some of which have a direct link to AI were
discussed in this report. While other problems such as
research and implementation costs, and government
regulations are also challenges which are critical to the
successful implementation of personalized medicine, but not
addressed by the algorithms discussed in this report.
However, Personalized Medicine does not only faces
challenges; it does pose some challenges as well, such as;
changing the medical profession and practice to the extent
that some futurist think algorithms and machines could
replace most of the jobs doctors do today. Finally, a
successful implementation of personalized medicine would
save many lives and perfect the medical profession.

2) Naï
ve Bayesian
In a related research by [21] on Medical treatment using
data mining examining the relationship between diseases and
their treatments. Also to identify diseases names and
symptoms and extract the sentence containing that details
from an article, then get the relationship that exists between
the disease and the treatment. Naï
ve Bayesian algorithm was
used on pre-processed text to classify the information into
„cure‟, „prevent‟, and „side effects‟ to patients. The data used
for this research was a „live‟ template.
3) Support vector machines (SVM)
In a related study, [22] developed a Hybrid Machine
Learning (ML)-based methodology that is fused with an
SVM classifier in combination with Bag-of-Words
Representation and Natural Language Processing (NLP)
tasks for building an application that is capable of identifying
and disseminating healthcare information. This was
implemented using two representative models of a public
medical dataset containing 2700 record: Complement Naive
Bayes (CNB), which is adapted for text with imbalanced
class distribution with a linear classifier support vector
machine (SVM) with polynomial kernel, and a classifier that
always predicts the majority class in the training data (used as
a baseline). The best results obtained are: 98 percent
F-measure for the class Cure, 100 percent F-measure for the
class Prevent, and 75 percent F-measure for the Side Effect
class.

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

V. FUTURE TRENDS
Personalized Medicine is an active research area with a lot
of envisioned products and achievements. Some of these
442

W. Karen. (May 2013). GNS aims to help MDs know which treatment
will work the best for each patient. The Boston Globe. [Online].
Available:
http://www.bostonglobe.com/business/2013/05/12/personalized-medi
cine-goal-big-data-scientist/28gTkXjCDj6Zh6KP5tpNBO/story.html
B. U. Ozomaro, C. B. Nemeroff, C. Wahlestedt, A. Goal et al.,
“Personalized medicine and psychiatry: Dream or reality?” Psychiatric
Times, pp. 1-6, 2014.
G. S. Ginsburg and J. J. McCarthy, “Personalized medicine:
Revolutionizing drug discovery and patient care,” Trends Biotechnol.,
vol. 19, no. 12, pp. 491-496, Dec. 2001.
N. Douali and M.-C. Jaulent, “Genomic and personalized medicine
decision support system,” in Proc. 2012 IEEE Int. Conf. Complex Syst.,
Nov. 2012, pp. 1-4.
A. Katrin. (November, 2013). Let‟s get personal: Surfing the big waves
in big data and personalized medicine. MaRS. [Online]. Available:
http://www.marsdd.com/news-and-insights/lets-get-personal-surfing-b
ig-waves-big-data-personalized-medicine/
S. Galit, R. P. Nitin, and C. B. Peter, Data Mining for Business
Intelligence: Concepts, Techniques, and Applications in Microsoft
Excel® with XLMiner®, 2nd Edition, John Wiley & Sons, 2010, ch. 8,
pp. 102-104.

International Journal of Computer Theory and Engineering, Vol. 7, No. 6, December 2015
[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]
[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]
[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

R. Bardan, Artificial Neural Networks. Applications in Urology,
Department of Urology, Victor Babes University of Medicine and
Pharmacy, pp. 289-296, 2004.
I. Y. Khan, P. H. Zope, and S. R. Suralkar, “Importance of artificial
neural network in medical diagnosis disease like acute nephritis disease
and heart disease,” International Journal of Engineering Science and
Innovative Technology, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 210-217, 2013.
L. Auria and R. A. Moro, “Support vector machines (SVM) as a
technique for solvency analysis,” Discussion Papers of DIW Berlin, no.
811, 2008.
S. Martin. Disadvantages of support vector machines (SVM). [Online].
Available: http://www.svms.org/disadvantages.html
Personalized medicine coalition: Issues affecting adoption of
personalized medicine, American Society of Human Genetics, PMC
PM issues 3, 2007.
M. R. Kosorok, “Personalized medicine and artificial intelligence,”
Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Biostatistics University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, pp. 1-50, 2012.
K. J. Jang, G. Balakrishnan, Z. Syed, and N. Verma, “Scalable
customization of atrial fibrillation detection in cardiac monitoring
devices: Increasing detection accuracy through personalized
monitoring in large patient populations,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol.
Soc. Conf., Jan. 2011, vol. 2011, pp. 2184-2187.
S. Kumar and G. Kaur, Detection of Heart Diseases Using Fuzzy Logic,
vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 2694-2699, 2013.
Y. Zhang and P. Szolovits, “Patient-specific learning in real time for
adaptive monitoring in critical care,” J. Biomed. Inform., vol. 41, no. 3,
pp. 452-460, Jun. 2008.
F. Amato, A. López, E. M. Peña-Méndez, P. Vaňhara, A. Hampl, and J.
Havel, “Artificial neural networks in medical diagnosis,” J. Appl.
Biomed., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 47-58, 2013.
K. Kumar and A. Abhishek, “Artificial neural networks for diagnosis
of kidney stones disease,” Int. J. Inf. Technol. Comput. Sci., vol. 4, no.
7, pp. 20-25, Jul. 2012.
D. Biswas, S. Bairagi, N. Panse, and N. Shinde, “Disease diagnosis
system,” International Journal of Computer Science & Informatics, vol.
1, issue 2, 2011.
P. S. K. Patra, “An expert system for diagnosis of human diseases,”
International Journal of Computer Applications, vol. 1, no. 13, pp.
71-73, 2010.
E. Orunesu, M. Bagnasco, C, Salmaso, V. Altrinetti, P. Del Monte, G.
Pesce, M. Marugo, and G. S. Mela, “Use of an artificial neural network
to predict graves ‟ disease outcome within 2 years of drug withdrawal,”
European Journal of Clinical Investigation, vol. 34, issue 3, pp.
210-217, 2004.
S. Ghumbre, C. Patil, and A. Ghatol, “Heart disease diagnosis using
support vector machine,” in Proc. International Conference on
Computer Science and Information Technology, 2011, pp. 84-88.

443

[22] K. Srinivasarao, “Hybrid machine learning implementations for
classifying disease-treatment relations in short texts,” International
Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science and Software
Engineering, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 63-67, 2014.
[23] H. Jeremy. (April, 2014). Small robot surgeon designed to work inside
astronaut‟s bodies. IEEE Spectrum. [Online]. Available:
http://spectrum.ieee.org/tech-talk/robotics/medical-robots/tiny-robot-s
urgeon-designed-to-work-inside-astronauts-bodies

Rose Atuah received the bachelor degree in information
communication technology from Ghana Institute for
Management and Public Administration in 2011. She is
currently pursuing a master degree in software
technology at University Kebangsaan Malaysia with
interest in software design and business process
modeling.

Ali Garba Garba received the bachelor degree in
software engineering with multimedia from the
Limkokwing University of Creative Technology in 2012.
Currently he is pursuing the M.Sc. degree in information
technology (industrial computing) at University
Kebangsaan Malaysia. His main research interests include
computer vision, machine learning and medical image
analysis.

Anahita Ghazvini received the bachelor degree with
honours in information technology (computer science) at
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM) in 2013.
Currently she is pursuing a master degree in information
technology (artificial intelligence) at University
Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM) with interest in machine
learning, image processing and computer vision.

Jamilu Awwalu received his bachelor degree in business
computing and information technology from the
University of Wales in 2010. He is currently pursuing the
M.Sc. degree in information technology (artificial
intelligence) at University Kebangsaan Malaysia.
His research interests include opinion mining and
sentiment analysis, image processing, computer vision and
machine learning.

