See	discussions,	stats,	and	author	profiles	for	this	publication	at:	http://www.researchgate.net/publication/271424388

AI-Board	-An	Artificial	Intelligence	Problem
Resolution	and	Learning	System
TECHNICAL	REPORT	·	JANUARY	2015
DOI:	10.13140/2.1.1490.9761

READS

113

1	AUTHOR:
Pedro	Ferreira
Universidade	Federal	do	Ceará
5	PUBLICATIONS			0	CITATIONS			
SEE	PROFILE

Available	from:	Pedro	Ferreira
Retrieved	on:	28	September	2015

AI-Board - An Artificial Intelligence Problem Resolution
and Learning System
Pedro Ferreira
Jan/2015

ABSTRACT
This paper describes the AI-Board System, composed of Khalid, AIDL and Hasina, respectively an AILibrary, an AI Problem description language and a Mind System. This describes the plan of work.
DISCLAIMER
This work is intended for mind and cognitive simulation in animations and games mainly. Some of
the real-world applications that go outside the simulated environment don’t aim on a real robot
factoring.
INTRODUCTION

architecture. It has the short-term memory, that
stores data that was or is under utilization currently.
It also has the medium term memory. Data that is
stored in the medium term memory can be pulled
from it, and then saved into the short-term memory
for utilization by the brain (Remembering process).
To finish, there is the long-term memory, that stores
data that wasn’t being used for a very long time.
This data is kind of compressed, and the recovery
of this data depends of many factories, such as
concentration, relaxation and meditation.

1. Khalid
Khalid is basically an AI Library that encapsulates
all state-of-the-art Artificial Intelligence data
structures and algorithms. It has implementation of
simple agents, search agents, planning agents,
neural network agents, and much more. It’s
designed to have two implementations: one in Java,
and other in C. The C version shall be able to join
the kernel space, so that AI-Board can can be
encapsulated into a kernel module.

On Hasina, information is atomic with the Node
data structure. Each node has two basic
components: Data and Connections.

The Java version
The Java version
development.

of

the

library

is

under

•

The data part are designed to store the
information that is stored into it.

•

The connections part are designed to build
connections among different nodes. They
can be edges or multiedges, representing all
the connections.

The C version
The C version of the library is under development.
2. Hasina
Hasina is a Knowledge Representation system
based on ontologies, implemented through a logical
system.

Data 0

Before starting to display figures about Hasina
architecture, let’s discuss some elements that
belong to it, to understand their real objective and
need.

Data 3
Data 1

Data 2

Besides the node structure, there are the places
where the information is built on.

Data Storage Subsystem
This subsystem is responsible to save brain data for
use by the reasoning process. It’s a three-layer

1

AI-Board - An Artificial Intelligence Problem Resolution and Learning System
memories are for organization and storage.
STM

MTM

3. AIDL

LTM

AIDL is Artificial Intelligence Description Language,
and it’s a language that describe programs,
problems and data of Artificial Intelligence. It covers
distinct main areas of AI [1]:

We basically have:
•Short-term memory (STM) – In this area of the
memory, it’s stored the information over with agent
is working and reasoning on.

• Problem Solving – In which see how an

•Medium-term memory (MTM) – This area is a few
less accessible than Short-term memory. Agent
doesn’t reason over this data.

•

•Long-Term memory (LTM) – This area is a few
less accessible than Medium-term memory. Agent
doesn’t reason over this data. This data is
compressed and classified. Any attempt to access
this memory through usual ways will take some
time, and will require agent concentration.

•
•

(1) Remembering Subsystem
Remembering Subsystem is responsible for
bringing data up from medium-term memory and
long-term memory into the short-term memory, so
that this data can be used by the agent.
Remembering is generally a consequence of reheard of some subject. When some sensor brings a
data to the agent, it will search through its boundary
to retrieve all related information originated from the
data’s relationship.

•

agent can find a sequence of actions that
achieves its goals when no single action
will do.
Knowledge and Reasoning – In which we
design
agents
that
can
form
representations of a complex world, and
use these new representations to deduce
what to do.
Uncertain Knowledge and Reasoning –
In which we see how an agent can tame
uncertainty with degrees of belief.
Learning – In which we describe agents
that can improve their behavior through
diligent study of their own experiences.
Communicating, Perceiving and Acting –
In which we see how to make use of the
copious knowledge that is expressed in
natural language.

4. AI-Board
AI-Board is a complex software system that is
based mainly on the three technologies above to be
able to understand and solve Artificial Intelligence
problems.
It has basically four main submodules: Intelligence
Unities – Problem Solving units based on the Khalid
library; Problem Management Unit – A central unit
that distribute problems among the different
Intelligence Unities and is also capable to join
solutions for complex problems (divide and
conquer); AIDL Interpreter – An interpreter for the
AIDL Language; I/O Interfaces – A set of interfaces
that play the roles of sensors and actors in the
system.

Sometimes, data is remembered spontaneously,
without any reasonable reason for the knowledge
appear. It’s a kind of entropy. The module
responsible for that is called Reflex Subsystem.
The reflex subsystem remember information a kind
of randomly. The data that will be remembered
depends on the location where the data is, together
with its age / utilisation.

It has the following conceptual architecture:
(2) Reasoning Subsystem
The reasoning Subsystem is responsible for
gathering new information based on the existing
information (in the short-term memory). This
information is generated from the information that is
in the short term memory. The short memory is
mainly used for computation, while the other

2

AI-Board - An Artificial Intelligence Problem Resolution and Learning System
orchestration among all Intelligence Unities.
Basically, Problem Management Unit sends
problems to the intelligence unities to solve. If
the problem is static, then there is only one
piece of data back – the problem solution; if
the problem is dynamic, then there is opened
a data stream between these two components
so that data can be sent while the problem
environment is running.

•

Below, the reader can better understand the meaning
and function of each box:

•

Problem Management Unit – I/O Interfaces
– I/O Interfaces send and receive data to and
from the Problem Management Unit. It always
depend on the implementation of the
interface. For example, an “eye” always
receives data from the environment, but it’s
not always that AI-Board cares about this
data, once it can be busy processing the
problem solution, and ignoring all it sees,
because
it’s
focused
on
something.
Depending on the eye implementation, some
part of the data can be cached or simply
ignored. All that the AI-Board standard defines
is an interface for the I/O interfaces, and the
kind of data that it can exchange. Whenever
an I/O interface wants to send data to the
Problem Management Unit, it normally does
raise a signal to it, so that it can open a data
stream, or reject the request, because it’s
busy.

•

AI-Board – This box represents the agent
itself, containing all of its components.
Intelligence Unit – This box represents a
problem solving unit, that can solve unit
problems or can simulate a live agent.
Problem Management Unit – This box
represents the problem distribution manager
that will allocate problems to each problem.
AIDL Interpreter – This box represents an

•

interpreter for the Artificial Intelligence
Description Language. It receives data from
the I/O interfaces, and send to the Problem
Management Unit Core to rightly distribute the 5. Applications
problems or questions to the Intelligence
AI-Board, with it’s kernel-based design, can have a
Units
lot of practical applications, both in toy world and in
I/O Interfaces – This box represents a set of real world problems

•
•

I/O interfaces that establish communication
Toy World Problems
for the Problem Management Unit (more
specifically the AIDL Interpreter) and the
• Bast-Universe – This project is a kind of an
outside world..
aquarium, that comprises an simulated
environment physical environment, and a set
or robots intended to interact together, as a
Regarding communications between the modules, we
community. The purpose of this project is to
have:
study how the robots can learn alone and in
group (socially). This is actually being
developed by our group.
• Intelligence Unit – Problem Management
•
Vacuum-World Problem – This problem
Unit – As we already know, Problem
consists of a MxN grid, with one or more
Management Unit is responsible for managing
cleaner agents that clean the possible dirty
the problems and their distribution and
in each cell of the grid. Each cell can be dirty

3

AI-Board - An Artificial Intelligence Problem Resolution and Learning System
or clean. There are some variations of the
problem, including one that the dirty can be
back after being cleaned, also, the agent can
clean with an additive, that keeps the cell
safe from being re-dirty after T time unities.
Real World Problems
•

•

Social Network Helper – Today, the social
networks play a great role in the social
interaction of people. Sometimes, busy
people don’t have time to maintain their
social networks updated, acting and reacting
to the action of others. The idea here is map
the behavior of the user, and use this
knowledge to automate the posting and
privacy protection in the social network
profile
Intelligent Environments – Imagine an
intelligent house, that automate a lot of tasks
for a family. AI-Board could be the kernel of
that, in the sense of information, and also in
the sense of intelligent environments, for
example, detecting that the children are
watching TV, and turning on the parental
settings on the TV, or detecting that the man
woke up, and turn on the TV on news, and
prepare the toast. There are a lot of
variations of this scenarion, for example, an
store with electronic showcase, and it
displays what the customer has more
probability to buy, based on its buying history
in the store, and also in his main
characteristics, as age, gender, etc.

4

AI-Board - An Artificial Intelligence Problem Resolution and Learning System

References
[1] Russel, Stuart and Norving, Peter – Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, Third Edition, 2010
[2] Ernst, G.W. and Newell, A. (1969). – GPS: a case study in generality and problem solving.
Academic Press. (revised version of Ernst's 1966 dissertation, Carnegie Institute of Technology.)
[3] Enderton, Herbert B. (2001) – A Mathematical Introduction to Logic (2 nd edition)
[4] Enderton, Herbert B. (1977) – Elements of Set Theory
[5] van Dalen, Dirk (2008) – Logic and Structure (4 th edition)
[6] Kernigham, Brian W. and Ritchie, Dennis M. – The C Programming Language, 2nd Edition by (Apr
1, 1988)
[7] Wang, Y. 2006. A Layered Reference Model of the Brain (LRMB), IEEE Trans. on Systems, Man,
and Cybernetics (PartC), Vol. 36, No. 2
[8] Bogner, M., Ramamurthy, U., Franklin, S. 2015. “Consciousness” and Conceptual Learning in a
Socially Situated agent, Institute of Intelligent Systems, The University of Memphis
[9] Davis, R., Shrobe, H, Szolovits, P. 1993. What is a Knowledge Representation? AI Magazine, 14(1):
17-33, 1993
[10] Barsalou, L. W. 1999. Perceptual symbol systems, Behavioral and Brain Sciences (1999) 22:577660
[11] Barsalou, L W. 2013. Mirroring as Pattern
Conceptualizations. Cortex 49 (2013) 2951-2953

Completion

Inferences

withing

Situated

[12] Pezzulo, G., Barsalou, L. W., Cangelosi, A., Fischer, M. H., McRae, K, Spivey, M. J. 2012.
Computational Grounded Cognition: a new alliance between grounded cognition and computation
modelling, DOI> 10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00612
[13] Powers, T. W., Abbot, B., Carey, T. A., Goldstein, D. M., Mansell, W., Marken, Marken, R. S., Nevin,
B., Robertson, R., Taylor, M. 2011. http://www.pctweb.org
[14] Wang, Y. 2010. On Formal and Cognitive Semantics for Semantic Computing, International Journal
of Semantic Computing, Vol. 4, No. 2 (2010) 1-34, DOI 10.1142/S1793351X10000833

5

