Artificial Intelligence and Pro-Social Behaviour
Joanna J. Bryson

Abstract If artificial intelligence (AI) were achievable, what would the consequences be for human society?1 Perhaps surprisingly, the answer to this question
is already at hand. We are achieving rapid and accelerating success in our quest
to build AI. That very success — and the slowness with which both the academic
community and the general public have come to recognise it — has shown how little we understand our own intelligence, and its role in our lives and culture. Here I
attempt to address this problem of understanding, exploiting a variety of scientific
evidence, including social simulation. I begin by reviewing current progress in AI,
which is profound but underestimated. I suggest this lack of recognition is due to the
mistaken belief that intelligence implies agency. I next examine the related question
of human uniqueness: why do only we have language and extensive built culture? I
use models and data to show that the propensities to use culture, share information
and behave altruistically are neither unique to humans nor inexplicable to biology,
but rather our uniqueness hinges on the extent of our capacities for communication
and memory. Finally, I apply the impact of AI on extending our intelligence to these
theories, to predict—and observe—consequences of AI on human societies and individual human lives. I make and support policy recommendations based on these
predictions.
Keywords: artificial intelligence; levels of selection; agency; human behavioural
ecology; cognition

Joanna J. Bryson
University of Bath, BA2 7AY, United Kingdom e-mail: J.J.Bryson@bath.ac.uk
1

This is the secondish (September 28, 2014) and presumed final pre-proof draft of a chapter for a
2014 collection edited by Catrin Misselhorn on Collective Agency. If you have a shorter or undated
version of this chapter, please delete it—it’s older.

1

2

Joanna J. Bryson

1 Introduction
Collective agency is not a discrete characteristic of a system, but rather a spectrum condition. Individuals composing a collective must invest some resources in
maintaining themselves as well as some in maintaining the collective’s goals and
structures. The question of how much to invest at which level of organisation is
a complex one, for which there may be many viable solutions. For example, one
might consider a married parent to be a member of three families—their parents’,
their partners’ parents’, and the new one they have created with their partner; a citizen of a village, state and country; an employee of at least one organisation, in which
they may also be members of either orthogonal or nested teams; and a member of
various other voluntary organisations. Some individuals will seek situations with
more or fewer such memberships of collectives. Nevertheless, all of us constantly
make choices—not always explicit—about how much attention and effort to devote
to influencing the behaviour of each collective of which we are members.
Artificial intelligence is ordinarily seen as something quite separate from all the
complexity of human social arrangements (Gunkel, 2012). We picture AI as also
having agency, like a human, then generally dismiss this vision as not possible, or
at least not present. Such dismissal of AI is a mistake. Intelligent is not a synonym
for human. It is just one attribute of humans, many other animals, and even plants
(Trewavas, 2005). In itself, intelligence does not determine personhood, nor is it
sufficient for moral subjectivity. It is neither necessary nor sufficient for the autonomy that underlies moral agency. Mathematics is normally considered to require
intelligence (Skemp, 1961), yet calculators prove that arithmetic and geometry at
least can be conducted without a capacity for setting autonomous goals. Plants can
autonomously pursue goals, and change their behaviour in response to their environment, but plants are not considered either moral patients deserving protection2 ,
nor moral agents responsible for their actions. Therefore, artificial intelligence does
not imply any sort of agency. Rather, like any other artefact, AI could be seen as an
extension of human agency (Bryson and Kime, 2011).
The purpose of this chapter is to examine how technology, particularly AI, is
changing human collective behaviour and therefore both our collective and our individual agency. My intention is to be primarily descriptive, but there is of course a
normative subtext, which I will attempt to make as explicit as possible. This primarily imposes on the final section of the chapter, Section 5, and results in some policy recommendations. This chapter’s principal normative motivation is that society
should better understand itself, so that it can better choose goals for the regulation
and governance of AI, privacy and personal data. This is because using our data, AI
can generate predictions of our behaviour, which increases the utility of and propensity for investment at the collective level. These increases can result in changes not
only to our societies, but as a consequence to the experience and meaning of being
an individual.
2

Except where plants are seen as either a part of a broader ecosystem, or as a possession of a
human.

Artificial Intelligence and Pro-Social Behaviour

3

In the following sections, I first further describe intelligence and the current state
of AI. Next I describe current scientific understanding concerning why humanity
is in its unique situation of knowing and therefore having responsibility, and how
this relates to our tendency for collective and pro-social action. I will then describe
a series of scientific results, some from social simulations, demonstrating the ease
with which pro-sociality can evolve, and which elucidate the limits to which we and
other species can and should invest in the collective. Finally, I close by using the
models from the earlier sections to project consequences of the advances in AI on
human culture and human collectives. These predictions will be based simply on
extending my description of intelligence and AI to the models of social investment
and examining their consequences.

2 Intelligence and the State of AI
To draw conclusions concerning the consequences of intelligence, we first need to
define the term. For the purposes of this chapter, I will not attempt to capture its
ordinary language meaning, but rather will introduce a simple, clear-cut computational definition of the term, which also relates to its characterisation in biology.
Intelligence is capacity to
1. express an appropriate action,
2. in real time, and
3. in response to a perceived environment.
Each of these components must be explained in turn. Expressing an action is necessary for intelligence to be judged—we will not consider any ‘inner life’ that is not
demonstrated through some action, though action may include communication. Appropriate implies some goal, so any intelligent system has some metric by which its
performance is judged. For biological systems, this is generally something related to
survival3 . For AI, we the makers define the goals. So for a calculator, it is sufficient
to respond to button presses without noticing weather events. In real time is not a
theoretical requirement of intelligence, but rather indicates that I am limiting my
consideration to what also might be called cognitive systems (Vernon et al., 2007).
It means that the agent exists in a dynamic environment, and can express action
quickly enough that that action is generally still appropriate. “Generally” because
of course very intelligent systems occasionally have traffic accidents—intelligence
is not all-or-nothing, but rather varies in extent. I include the real-time requirement
to focus on competences that find an appropriate action according to an agent’s
own sensing. This is to discriminate from processes like evolution or other abstract
mathematical algorithms which may contribute to intelligence but do not produce
a direct action outcome. Finally, in response to a perceived environment eliminates
from consideration objects that act the same way at all times and just happen to
3

The arguments in this chapter hinge on inclusive fitness (Hamilton, 1964; Gardner and West,
2014) rather than individual survival, but I postpone that discussion here. It is appears in Section 3.

4

Joanna J. Bryson

sometimes be in an appropriate place and time when they do so. It also emphasises
the importance of sensing to intelligence. Intelligence is judged by its actions as
they relate to a context; the ability to perceive and discriminate contexts is therefore
critical to intelligence.
Collective agency is not necessarily collective intelligence. Agency implies the
capacity to be the author of environmental change. This change can be effected by
a collective whether or not the authorship or motivation was achieved in a fully
distributed way, as we might expect in collective intelligence (Williams Woolley
et al., 2010). While intelligence originates change, that change can be effected by
other agents that are not the original motivated entity. A captain may determine a
team’s strategy, a gardener may determine which wall an ivy will cover. On the other
hand, observable collective intelligence is necessarily a form of collective agency. A
swarm of insects may choose a new hive location (Marshall et al., 2009); a company
may sue for changes in law enforcement (Rosenbaum, 2014).
An Internet search is a highly intelligent process, requiring enormous capacity for
perception — the perceptual ability to categorise billions of web pages based on a
context set by search terms, and the action competence to serve one of these billions
to your screen. But the agent responsible for the act, and that (principally4 ) benefits
from that act is the human that requests the search. Here the expressed action of
the individual user couldn’t have been achieved without intelligence belonging to
the corporation behind the search, but the motive force for the search is entirely
individual.
A websearch is just one example of the AI-augmented individual capacities that
have come to pervade twenty-first century life. Others include processes on phones
that facilitate our communication, scheduling and even picture taking; AI in our
word processors that increases our capacity to effectively communicate by checking
grammar and spelling; filters on email that detect spam; filters on credit card expenditures that detect possible fraud; and filters on surveillance cameras that recognise
faces, license-plate numbers, and even detect the emotions and intentions underlying human voices and gestures (Valstar and Pantic, 2012; Griffin et al., 2013; Eyben
et al., 2013; Kleinsmith and Bianchi-Berthouze, 2013; Hofmann et al., 2014).
This intelligence enhances the agency of both individuals and corporations (see
footnote 4) but has not produced a set of independent artificial actors competing with
us for resources as imagined in science fiction. This lack of immediate, apparent,
competitive threat, plus a heavy cultural investment in the privileges assumed to
associate with human uniqueness, lead many to dismiss the possibility of AI, at the
very time it is not only present but fundamentally changing our individual and social
capacities.
AI has not yet caused significant change to our direct mechanical capacity for
action. In terms of physically altering the world, AI requires a robot. The most
prominent robots today are mechanisations of machines we can also use without
AI, such as vacuum cleaners, cars and other tele-operated vehicles. We are now
4

Search companies record information about searches and the response of users to the web pages
served, so those companies are also intelligent and motivated agents that benefit from the act of the
search, but they do not originate it.

Artificial Intelligence and Pro-Social Behaviour

5

capable of acting much faster and at a much greater distance than we could before,
but this is primarily due to improvements in telecommunication which are largely
(though not entirely) independent of AI.
The way in which current AI fundamentally alters humanity is by altering our
capacity for perception—our ability to sense what is in the world. Part of this is also
due to communication. For example, we can now see what is happening very far
away very quickly. But much more than this, we can remember and recall identical
or even similar situations to one we presently observe. Other apes can do that too,
but with language and subsequently writing, humans have had a special advantage
which is that we can recall situations and actions we have not directly experienced.
The reason that we can exploit similar rather than just identical previous contexts
for recall is because we store this knowledge in abstract models. Abstraction saves
storage space, but even more importantly allows for generalisation to new situations
(Bishop, 2006). In the simplest case we can find a ‘near neighbour’ context, treat
the present one as the same, and expect similar outcomes (Lopez De Mantaras et al.,
2005). Beyond this, we can use models to extrapolate to conditions we have not yet
seen, so long as variation within the models tends to be continuous, and the new
context does not differ extremely from our historical record. In such conditions we
can generate novel variations on previous actions to meet the new conditions (Schaal
and Atkeson, 1998; Huang et al., 2013).
These processes are ordinarily referred to as machine learning. The reason I am
describing them rather as perception is this: I want to emphasise that a great deal
of intelligence is the problem of learning to recognise the categories of contexts
in which a particular action is appropriate. Or another way to think of this is that
with enough experience and a well-structured model for storing and recalling that
experience, we can use the past to recognise the present and therefore predict and
address the future.
There are two reasons that AI is generating staggering increases in humanity’s
available intelligence. First, the basic concepts of learning in general and machine
learning in particular described above have been understood for decades (Hertz
et al., 1991). In those decades our algorithms for building models have been steadily
improving—the recently-trendy deep learning is just one of many fundamental improvements made over that time (Jacobs et al., 1991; McLachlan and Krishnan,
2008; Hinton et al., 2006; Le Roux and Bengio, 2008). Second, we have found ways
to both acquire and store the data that makes up experience in digital format. Thus
our models are better, bigger and over a vastly wider variety of human experience.
For example, we no longer need to guess why and how people will vote or riot—
enough of them happily broadcast their intentions and concerns on the Internet. The
important thing to understand is that our models have become sufficiently good, that
even where our data is biased, often we can compensate for that bias and still make
accurate predictions (Beauchamp, 2013; Wang et al., 2014a; Voter, 2014).

6

Joanna J. Bryson

3 Cooperation and Collective Agency
Prosthetic intelligence affects our lives in innumerable ways, most notably simply
by allowing us to make more informed decisions, whether by providing more immediate access to restaurant reviews, health care advice or the day’s weather forecast.
But in this chapter, and in keeping with the rest of this book, I focus on an even
more fundamental aspect of human behaviour—our propensity for cooperation and
information sharing, and how exponential rates of improvement in our AI may affect
these.
The human propensity for cooperation is often seen as unique (Sober and Wilson,
1998; Henrich et al., 2001). There is no denying that humans are extraordinary in a
number of ways: the extent and variety of our built culture, our language and written histories, and our recent domination of the planet’s biomass (Haberl et al., 2007;
Barnosky, 2008). These indicators of uniqueness are not necessarily or even likely
to be independent. For example, our propensity to share information might explain
why we have accumulated the culture that allows us to dominate other species. Science considers the simplest viable explanation for any phenomena to be the most
likely, so many researchers have been searching for a single-point explanation for
human uniqueness.
Cooperation is however not at all unique to humans. Assuming only that we
are talking about observed cooperative behaviour, not cooperative intent or forward
planning, then cooperation is ubiquitous in nature. For the purpose of this chapter,
I will define cooperation as the expression of altruistic behaviour among a collection of individuals. For altruistic I use a standard definition: an action which at least
when executed is net costly to the actor, but provides net benefit to another agent.
Although standard (Gintis et al., 2005), this definition is not universally accepted.
Some biologists (and philosophers) are only happy to label an action ‘altruistic’ if
over the entire lifetime of the individual its expected net value is costly, a situation
which never occurs in nature (cf. Sylwester et al., 2014). However, the current understanding and explanation of cooperation in fields like economics and biological anthropology is that cooperation consists of costly actions that produce a public good.
Even if the actor or their relatives are likely to get a disproportionate amount of that
good, the fact that it facilitates communal benefits makes it cooperative (Burkart
et al., 2014; Silva and Mace, 2014; Taylor and Bryson, 2014). These types of explanations have been used to account for cooperation in nature—cooperation that
often extends to one-way and even ultimate sacrifices by an individual agent for the
collective good (Ackermann et al., 2008; Ferguson-Gow et al., 2014; Carter et al.,
2014; Hobaiter et al., 2014).
By this definition, we can see that even the ultimately ‘selfish’ genes in fact exist entirely in cooperative contexts, collaborating with their competitors to compose
multi-gene organisms (Dawkins, 1976, 1982). The level of agency we are used to
reasoning about as individual, that is macroscopic animals and plants, are the ve-

Artificial Intelligence and Pro-Social Behaviour

7

hicles for hosts of competing replicators—genes, and arguably memes5 . The vast
majority of macroscopic life reproduces sexually, which is to say the individual
agent is not replicated at all, but rather manages to replicate just (generally) half of
its own genes in each of its offspring (Okasha, 2012). However, these offspring are
nearly always shared with another organism of the same species, and consequently
necessarily share the vast majority of their replicators with both of their parents.
Cooperation between living individuals then is highly adaptive6 , simply because
copies of the same replicators that control the selection of the altruistic behaviour
are very, very likely to reside in the individuals that receive the benefit (Hamilton,
1964; Gardner and West, 2014). This explanation of altruism is currently known as
inclusive fitness, but has been mathematically related to the possibly more familiar concepts of kin selection and group selection (Gardner et al., 2011; Marshall,
2011). To further complicate matters, social behaviour is in fact often controlled by
replicators that are themselves socially communicated, whether in bacteria (Rankin
et al., 2010), humans (Schroeder et al., 2014), or human institutions (Sytch and
Tatarynowicz, 2014)7 . What matters therefore is not overall relatedness, but a robust
capacity of socialising behaviours to survive—presumably by replication—into the
future.
To return to the conundrum of human uniqueness, my own hypothesis is that
human uniqueness results not from a single cause but from a unique conjunction,
at least in terms of extent, of two relatively common traits—a reliance on cognition, culture, and memory, found also in the other great apes and probably other
long-lived species (Whiten et al., 1999; McComb et al., 2001; Kr¨utzen et al., 2005;
Perry and Manson, 2003); and a capacity for vocal imitation, something no other ape
(or monkey) exhibits, but that has evolved several times apparently independently
across a range of taxa8 (Fitch, 2000; Bispham, 2006; Bryson, 2008; Fitch and Zuberb¨uhler, 2013). Vocal imitation provides a communication medium sufficiently
rich to support the redundancy necessary for an unsupervised learning process like
evolution to operate across our vocalisations (Bryson, 2009). Evolution over primate
vocalisations, where selection is on both utility and memorability, could produce the
system of human language, (as per Smith and Kirby, 2008; Wray, 1998; Wray and
Grace, 2007). Our ape characteristics—long lives and memories, and predisposition
to use culturally-acquired behaviour—allowed us to accumulate sufficient data to
facilitate this process, and now allow the learning of complex languages.
5

Memes are the hypothesised replicators for horizontal (non-genetic) transmission of behaviour.
Like genes, they have yet to be precisely defined or measured (Mesoudi et al., 2004). It is also
not yet clear the extent to which they change in frequency in accordance to Darwinian evolution
(El Mouden et al., 2014). Nevertheless, memes are widely acknowledged as a useful abstraction
for thinking about the transfer of traits expressed as behaviour between individuals by means other
than biological reproduction.
6 Adaptive in the biological sense of having been facilitating selection. The AI literature sometimes
uses the term adaptive to mean plastic or mutable.
7 Further, humans at least may choose to associate with those with similar gene structure even
where they are not family members (Christakis and Fowler, 2014).
8 The capacity to recognise novel sounds and to learn novel contexts to express sounds should not
be confused with the capacity for vocal imitation (Bryson, 2009; Fitch and Zuberb¨uhler, 2013).

8

Joanna J. Bryson

Thus no one invented language. Language evolved as a public good, and with
it an accumulating catalogue of complex, useful concepts—far more than one individual was otherwise likely to discover or invent for themselves (Dennett, 2002).
Language might be thought of as the first AI—it is an artefact that massively extends our individual levels of intelligence. As I introduced earlier and will argue
more forcefully in the final section, taking our definition of AI to include the motivationless, locationless artefacts that are spoken and written language is a more
useful and certainly less dangerous extreme than assuming something is not AI if
it is not perfectly humanlike. Regardless of whether you will accept language as
AI, its intelligence-enhancing properties have consequences for the extent of our
cooperation, as I discuss in the next section. Language and culture also may have
spectacular consequences for human relatedness, as utilised in theoretical biology
for computing the probability of altruistic acts due to inclusive fitness. Language
and the culture that it facilitates increase the proportion of our replicators that are
shared horizontally. This not only impacts the proportion of our relatedness, but also
its plasticity, as humans can rapidly find and communicate ideas that discriminate
as well as unite (Krosch and Amodio, 2014).
The fact that our relatedness depends on socially-communicated replicators has
significant ramifications for collective agency. Genes, individual animals, herds,
families, villages, companies and religious denominations can all in some sense be
said to be agents — they can all act in ways that effect change in the world. Many
of these agencies are composed of others, and further at any level at which there
can be seen to be action selection, there can also be seen to be evolutionary selection — at least some reenforcement for decisions taken, and some competition with
other actors for limited resources (Wilson, 1989; Keller, 1999). Every such point
of selection an agent faces presents them with an action-selection conundrum: how
much resource (including, for entities that have it, attention) should that collection
of opportunities and threats be allocated?

4 Factors Determining Investment in the Collective
4.1 Problem Specification and Methods
Before we can understand how AI may affect our identities and our societies, we
need to form an understanding of how anything can affect these, and in what ways.
In this section I address the question that both began this chapter and concluded the
previous section: how do agents determine how much resource to devote to which
level of the collectives in which they can have an effect? Because its answer hinges
on perception and communication, this question will lead into the final discussion
of AI’s impact on our selves and our collectives.
Let us start by thinking about the problem in terms of a concrete case. An individual is living with a large number of others on a collectivised farm. This farm

Artificial Intelligence and Pro-Social Behaviour

9

has been set in competition with other farms, so that whichever farm performs the
best will be allocated more resources such as water, seed and fertiliser by the state.
Unfortunately, as is often the case in collectivised farming, the system is not very
efficient and not everyone is making enough money to have a family. Should our
focal individual devote their time to raising their individual status within their own
farm, so that their share of that farm’s product is increased? Or should they devote
their time to ensuring their farm will be more productive, so that the farm receives
more income to distribute? Either strategy might reward the individual with the desired level of income. Also, the strategies are not entirely mutually exclusive: some
time could be allocated to either, and if the individual is talented at managing then
perhaps both could be achieved with the same actions.
In general in biology, wherever we have tradeoffs like these we find a diversity of
solutions, with both different species and different individuals within species adopting different mixes of strategies (Darwin, 1859). It is important to remember that
while evolution is an optimising process, no species or individual is ever optimal.
This is for two reasons: both because the world constantly changes, altering the criteria of ‘optimum’; and because the number of possible strategies is inconceivably
vast. The vast number of available strategies necessitates that any present solution
is dependent not only on the optimising force of selection, but also on historical
accidents that determined what available variation natural selection has been able to
operate over9 .
Any such accident of variation may lead the locally-optimal strategy between two
individuals to be different. For our farmer, the optimal decision for their strategising
may depend on contexts local to the farm, such as opportunities for promotion based
on the age of the management team, or might change by the year depending on
the weather. In a good year, perhaps the best farms will be able to support a good
standard of living for all employees, but in a drought it may be essential to be in
the management tier. An individual farmer in a particular farm may have a better
chance at promotion due to their charisma, or a better chance at a game-changing
farming innovation due to their cleverness. The talents and position of close friends
or family among fellow employees could also determine the better strategy.
As the example above illustrates, we are unlikely to determine a single optimal
level of investment in a particular collective agency for any individual. However, we
can describe a set of factors which influence the utility of investment at different levels, and describe models of how these relate to each other. These models can inform
us about what strategies are most likely to be chosen, and how these probabilities
might change when new technologies can be used to magnify or repress the impact
of native characteristics. For example, if a new fertiliser is invented that allows all
the farms to produce enough so every individual might be able to have a family, then

9

The vast numbers of possible strategies is produced by a process called combinatorial explosion,
which I explain in more detail in Section 4.2. The importance of having a varied set of available
possible solutions in order for evolutionary selection to proceed is part of the ‘Fundamental theorem of evolution’ (Fisher, 1930; Price, 1972), and will be key in the final section of this chapter,
Section 5.

10

Joanna J. Bryson

this might eliminate the need to compete with other farms, and the farmer might best
invest their time in ensuring equitable distribution within their own farm.
Factors contributing to individual versus group-level investment can be roughly
decomposed into two categories:
1. Environmental: those factors exogenous to any of the agents’ replicators, such
as the weather, or that most individuals have very little influence over, such as
international policy on banking or the environment.
2. Social: factors that influence how a collective can function, such as its capacity
for communication, and the behavioural or genetic relatedness of its members
(see discussion of inclusive fitness, above).
There is good evidence that variation in environmental context can determine
the utility and structure of a collective. For example, spiteful, anti-social behaviour
seems to increase in regions with a low GDP (Herrmann et al., 2008a) or scarce
biomass (Prediger et al., 2013). Spite is the opposite of altruism—it is the willingness to pay a cost in to inflict a cost on others. This behaviour taken in isolation
is necessarily maladaptive, as it hurts not only the individual but also another who
almost certainly shares some measure of relatedness. It can only be accounted for
if it covaries with some other attribute, for example if expressing spite increases social dominance and thus helps individuals in local competition (Rand et al., 2010;
Powers et al., 2012)10 . These results imply that more cooperative behaviour occurs
when resources are more prevalent, but doesn’t explain a mechanism. Perhaps the
costs of a competitive strategy are less attractive when relative status is not essential to survival, or perhaps cooperation is a riskier strategy more often chosen when
participants are better resourced.
The objective of this chapter however is to examine the impact of AI on collective agency. While AI certainly does and will continue to affect the workings of
our financial markets, our capacity to damage or protect the environment, and so
forth; predicting the consequences of this impact requires an understanding of economics and politics beyond the knowledge of this author. Thus in the second part of
this section I focus on what I’ve just termed the social aspects of investment in the
collective. I review what is known about the ‘individual’ (animal- or vehicle-level)
decision to invest in public rather than private goods. Then in this chapter’s final section, I examine how prosthetic intelligence might be expected to alter values in these
equations to change our level of investment, and as a consequence, our identity.
Much of the evidence presented in this and the previous sections, including the
papers just cited by Rand et al. (2010) and Powers et al. (2012), derives from formal
models including social simulation. Given this chapter’s context in this volume—
where simulation has been presented by some (e.g. Arnold, 2014) as somehow
controversial—I will briefly revisit why and how simulations are now an accepted
part of the scientific method.
The role of simulations in science has been at times confused, not only by occasional bad practice (as with any method), but also by claims by some of the method’s
10

There is decent evidence that association with dominance is indeed the ultimate evolutionary
explanation for spiteful behaviour, see for a reviewSylwester et al. (2013).

Artificial Intelligence and Pro-Social Behaviour

11

innovators that simulations were a “third way” to do science (after induction and deduction, Axelrod, 1997). However, more recently a consensus has been reached that
simulation and modelling more generally are indeed a part of ordinary science (Dunbar, 2002; Kokko, 2007; Seth et al., 2012). The part that they are is theory building.
Every model is a theory — a very-well specified theory. In the case of simulations,
the models are theories expressed in so much detail that their consequences can be
checked by execution on a computer. Science requires two things: theories that explain the world, and data about the world which can be used to compare and validate
the theories. A simulation provides no data about the world, but it can provide a great
deal of ‘data’ about a theory. First, the very process of constructing a simulation can
show that a theory is incoherent—internally contradictory, or incomplete—makes
no account for some part of the system intended to be explained (Axelrod, 1997;
Whitehouse et al., 2012). Secondly, modelling in general can show us a fuller range
of consequences for a theory. This allows us to make specific, formal hypotheses
about processes too complex to entirely conceptualise inside a single human brain
(Dunbar, 2002; Kokko, 2007). The wide-spread acceptance of simulations as a part
of the scientific method can be seen by their inclusion in the highest levels of academic publication, both in the leading general science journals and in the flagship
journals for specific fields ranging from biology through political science.
Fortunately, a theory expressed formally as a simulation can also be expressed in
the traditional, informal, ordinary-language way as well. This is the technique I use
to describe the ‘outcomes’ (implications) of simulations throughout this chapter.

4.2 Models of Social Investment
In order for evolution to direct individuals to invest at a collective level two conditions need to hold. First, there needs to be some inclusive-fitness advantage for the
replicators involved in this ‘directing’ (cf. section 3 above.) Second, this advantage
has to be discoverable, and discovered. As mentioned in the first part of this section,
evolution optimises but never finds an optimum, partly because it cannot evaluate
all possible candidates due to the infinite size of the candidate pool. The size of this
pool derives from the fact that candidate ‘solutions’ are composed of combinations
of available features. The number of possible combinations is exponentially related
to the number of features: it is the number of features per candidate ( f ) raised to
the number of possible values for these features (v), or f v . This problem of combinatorics affects all forms of directed plasticity—that is, any system capable of
change which has an evaluation criterion. In the Computer Sciences, this problem
is known as combinatorial explosion, and characterises both AI planning and (machine) learning. But the same problem characterises both evolution and cognition,
and by ‘cognition’ I also mean to include both learning and planning, where they
are done by an individual over their or its lifetime.
To address the first condition first, inclusive-fitness (IF) benefit has proven a
spectacularly complicated concept to reason about, although its fundamental ve-

12

Joanna J. Bryson

racity has been demonstrated time and again in both simulation and empirical data
(Gardner and West, 2014, for a recent special issue). What makes IF difficult is not
only the confound of memetic as well as genetic replicators, but also the problem
of net benefit. We share genes with all life, nevertheless predation—and grazing—
evolve (Folse and Roughgarden, 2012; Ledgard, 2001). We tend to favour those
with whom we share more relatedness, yet our survival also depends on the stability
of the ecosystem to which we are adapted. Still, since the focus of this chapter is
on the impact of AI, I will neglect the Gaia-style analysis of ecosystemic agency
(see instead Margulis and Hinkle, 1997) and focus primarily on collectives consisting of a single species. Even here, IF leads to wildly counterintuitive effects, such
as that promiscuity in socially-monogamous animals can lead natural selection to
favour strategies that benefit the public good, such as mutual defence and conflict
resolution (Eliassen and Jørgensen, 2014).
Within species, families, or even swarms of clonal microbia, understanding IF
requires consideration of the net benefit of collaboration. The costs of cooperation
are not limited to the costs of the altruistic act, but also include the costs of cohabiting with close genetic relatives. These cohabitation costs include competition
for resources ranging from food to shelter to mates, and increased exposure to biological threats such as disease and predation which will specialise to a particular
species, immune system, and locale. In large animals the advantages of communal
living have long puzzled biologists, with avoidance of predation via ‘cover seeking’
with a mob being a key hypothesis (Hamilton, 1971). However this relationship is
not simple. Large populations also serve to attract predation and sustain disease (e.g.
Bischof et al., 2014; Bate and Hilker, 2013), though smaller group size does seem to
increase predation risk (Shultz and Finlayson, 2010). Recently in the megafauna literature there has been a new hypothesis, that individuals in populations might benefit from information transmission, of which vigilance against predators is just a special case (Crockford et al., 2012; Chivers and Ferrari, 2014; Hogan and Laskowski,
2013; Derex et al., 2013). Transmission of behaviour may be at least as important
as information about localised threats (Jaeggi et al., 2007; Dimitriu et al., 2014).
Note that behaviour itself, when transmitted horizontally (that is, not by genes to
offspring), must be transmitted as information via perception (Shannon, 2001). But
information is just one example of public goods held by non-human species. Others
include territory (including food, shelter and even mating resources, Preuschoft and
van Schaik, 2000; Dunbar et al., 2009), physical shelters, even digestive enzymes
(MacLean et al., 2010). Much of this cooperative production is performed by microbia, where in contrast to megafauna, genetic instructions for cooperative behaviour
can be exchanged horizontally—even across species—and injected into the cellular
organism to change a local population’s behaviour (Rankin et al., 2010; Dimitriu
et al., 2014).
Cooperation requires not only that the species affords some sort of cooperative
behaviour (e.g. the genetic coding for collaboratively building a hive), but also the
capacity to detect when it is a good time to invest in such an activity, and further
who is or are the best partners with which to engage. This last is of particular interest, because we know that a variety of species appear to shift between cooperative

Artificial Intelligence and Pro-Social Behaviour

13

phases of behaviour. Generalised reciprocity, first observed in Norwegian rats, is an
increase in expression of altruistic behaviour that follows the observation of others
engaged in cooperative acts (van Doorn and Taborsky, 2012; Gray et al., 2014). This
sort of behavioural flexibility might be thought useful for facilitating the spread of
cooperation, since it allows potential cooperators to suppress cooperative behaviour
in the presence of free riders that might exploit them. However such an interpretation may be biased. A better model might be more neutral, like our interpretation of
the phase changes in collective behaviour exhibited by slime mould as an adaptation
to localised environmental stress (Keller and Segel, 1970; Leimgruber et al., 2014).
MacLean et al. (2010) have openly challenged the idea that cooperative behaviour (the creation of public goods) is always something to be maximised. They
provide a case study of the production of digestive enzymes by the more altruistic of two isogenic yeast strains. The yeast must excrete these enzymes outside of
their bodies (cell walls) as they can only directly absorb pre-digested food. The production of these enzymes is costly, requiring difficult-to-construct proteins, and the
production of pre-digested food is beneficial not only to the excreting yeast but also
to any other yeast in its vicinity.
In the case of single-cell organisms there is no choice as to whether to be freeriding or pro-social—this is determined genetically by their strain. But the two
strategies are accessible to each other via a relatively common mutation. Natural
selection performs the action selection for a yeast collective by determining what
proportion of each strategy lives or dies. MacLean et al. (2010) demonstrate with
both empirical experiments and models that selection operates such that the species
as a whole benefits optimally. The altruistic strain in fact overproduces the public
good (the digestive enzymes) at a level that would be wasteful if it were the only
strategy pursued, while the free-riding strain underproduces. Where there are insufficient altruists free-riders starve, allowing altruists to invade. Where there are
too few free-riders excess food accumulates, allowing free-riders to invade. Thus
the greatest good—the most efficient exploitation of the available resources—is
achieved by the species through a mixture of over-enthusiastic altruism and free
riding. Why doesn’t evolution just optimise the species as a whole to produce the
optimal level of enzyme? Because the temporal cost (delay) associated with a single genome discovering a particular production level is greater than the temporal
stability of that optimal value, which is of course determined by the dynamics of
the ecosystem. In contrast, death and birth can be exceedingly rapid in microbia. A
mixed population composed of multiple strategies, where the high and low producers will always over and under produce (respectively) and their proportions can be
changed very rapidly is thus the best strategy for tracking the rate of environmental
change — for rapidly responding to variation in opportunity.
Bryson et al. (2014) recently proposed that a similar dynamic may explain cultural variation in the extent of apparently anti-social, spiteful behaviour. This variation was originally observed by Herrmann et al. (2008a), but not explained. In the
context of an anonymous economic game played in laboratories11 , some propor11

These were public goods games (PGG). Participants were separated by partitions and were
unable to interact with or identify other group members. They played games in groups of four,

14

Joanna J. Bryson

tion of nearly every population studied chose to punish (to pay a cost to penalise)
altruists who were acting in a way that benefited the punishers. This sort of behaviour, termed anti-social punishment (ASP), cannot be accounted for directly in
evolutionary models, but must give some indirect benefit (as mentioned earlier, Section 4.1). Herrmann et al. (2008a) discovered that the propensity for ASP correlates
with the gross domestic product (GDP) of the country where the experiments were
conducted, and also with its rule of law as measured by the World Values Survey
(Inglehart et al., 2004). Using the Herrmann et al. data set, Sylwester et al. (2014)
discovered that ASP results in a significant increase in variation in the level of investment in public goods, but not in any particular direction. In contrast, altruistic
punishment (of free riders) produces a measurable increase in investment, while
those receiving no punishment tend not to change their level of investment over repeated rounds of playing the game. This result is particularly striking because of
the anonymous nature of the game — because individuals did not know who punished them, they could not tell whether they were being punished by those giving
more or less than themselves12 . Nevertheless, humans seem to be well-equipped to
assess social context. We hypothesise that altruistic punishment is more likely to
be coordinated, and coordinated punishment is taken as an indication of ingroup
identity, signalling the construction of a collective, and this is what results in the
increased investment. ASP in contrast signals a conflict over social status, which
results in more varied behaviour, and therefore a greater potential rate of change for
the society (Fisher, 1930; Price, 1972).
This series of hypothesised mechanisms for adjusting investment in different levels of agency is key to the purpose of this chapter — to consider how AI changes
human collective agency. There are two points at which AI fundamentally changes
our social capacities: detecting appropriate contexts for expressing cooperative behaviours an agent already knows, and the discovery or innovation of new cooperative behaviours with or without the contexts for their expression. Both of these
points benefit by improved communication and superior perception.
with each participant able to either keep all of the endowment received from the experimenter
(20 experimental currency units; ECU) or contribute some portion of the endowment to the public
good. At the end of a round, all contributions were combined and the sum multiplied by 1.6.
The obtained amount was divided evenly amongst all of the group members, regardless of their
contribution. The payoff of each participant was calculated by summing up the amount kept and
the amount received from the public good. Ten rounds were played as described above, and also ten
rounds with the addition of punishment: participants could see the contributions of other players
to the pubic good and could decide how much they wished to spend on reducing the payoff to
other players. Participants could spend up to 10 ECU punishing the other players. Each ECU spent
on sanctioning resulted in 3 ECU being deducted from the payoff to the targeted individual. A
participant’s payoff was calculated by subtracting the amount of ECU spent on sanctioning and the
deduction points received from other players from the payoff from the PGG. Received deductions
were capped so as not to exceed PGG earnings. Participants did not receive information about who
deducted points from their payoff, making punishment anonymous. At the end of the experiment,
participants received real money in the local currency in exchange for the total ECU accumulated
across all rounds. See further Sylwester et al. (2014); Herrmann et al. (2008b).
12 Those who gave the most or the least to the group could assess the nature of the punishment
they received, but our results held even when these were excluded (Sylwester et al., 2014).

Artificial Intelligence and Pro-Social Behaviour

15

Choosing appropriate partners is a particularly important part of detecting contexts for behaviour. Cooperative behaviour is most sustainable when the benefit received from the agent’s cost will be high, and when there is similarly high benefit
for low cost likely to be produced by the agent’s collaborator(s). Thus where possible, cooperation often takes place in the context of a relationship where both the
needs of the other and the likelihood of their reciprocation can be judged. Zahavi
(1977) hypothesises that the time one agent spends with another is an honest signal of the value the first agent places on that relationship. Perry (2011) has used
this bond-testing hypothesis to explain strange dysphoric games played amongst
capuchins—monkeys well-known for both their intelligence and their aggressive
coalition behaviour where coalitions are not necessarily formed with close relatives.
Atkinson and Whitehouse (2011) suggest that time spent in mutual dysphoric situations underlies human religion, which serves the purpose of assuring human bonding
across groups that require mutual support. Taylor (2014) has recently extended the
bond-testing model, drawing attention to the fact that many human societies require
temporally-expensive displays of investment in the lives of others with whom a family may have long-term economic relations, thus guaranteeing each other assistance
in times of hardship. The time-costly displays (for example, constructing elaborate
gifts) guarantee that a family is not making many shallow investments, but rather
has only a few deeply-committed relationships.
In a more general and less specifically-human model than Taylor’s, Roughgarden et al. (2006) propose that an explanation for physical intimacy (beyond what
is necessary for procreation) may be that intimacy is a means of increased communication of physical status between potential coalition partners, allowing for the
discovery of mutually-advantageous equilibria with respect to the extent of cooperative investment. The suggestion is that this intimacy goes beyond mere partner
choice and timing to finding sufficient information about potential shared goals to
afford new cooperative activities (Roughgarden, 2012). Consider the implications
of these results on the earlier discussion of human exceptionalism. Language has
made humans the most extraordinary communicators in nature, and writing and AI
have accelerated these effects. But our exceptional communication is not limited to
deliberate or linguistic mechanisms — for an ape, even the amount of our communication by scent is exceptional (Stoddart, 1990; Roberts and Havlicek, 2011). This
could well explain the exceptional extent of our cooperation.
To summarise, these models show that there will always be a tradeoff between
investment in the individual and the collective. Individuals (at least some of them)
must be sustained for the collective to exist, so investment can never go to the extreme of being fully collective. However there are a large number of situations in
nature that are not zero sum — where altruism can evolve because the cost to the individual is lower than the benefit produced multiplied by the number of individuals
helped, divided by their relatedness to the focal individual (Hamilton, 1964). This
idea of ‘relatedness’ is tricky though — it really depends only on how related the
individuals are in whatever trait generates their social behaviour. Social behaviour
may itself be transmitted socially, even in microbia (Rankin et al., 2010). Also, relatedness is judged based on the pool of others with which the individual competes.

16

Joanna J. Bryson

So if competition is imposed on a large scale such as when a government forces
collective farms to compete between each other, two individuals in the same farm
may seem more related than when a drought sets in and the members of the farm
are set to competing with each other for survival (Lamba and Mace, 2011; Powers
et al., 2011).
We have also seen that investment strategies may vary within a population to the
benefit of that population overall; provided that the various strategies are accessible
to each other, again either by genetic or social transmission of the strategies. We
have seen that selecting appropriate partners can increase the benefit-to-cost ratio,
and thus support investing more heavily in cooperative, collective strategies. This
selection is dependent on being able to perceive the needs and abilities of others.
What would be the outcome for cooperative behaviour if we could exactly know the
needs and interests—and predict the future behaviour—of our neighbours?

5 The Impact of AI on Human Cooperation and Culture
My main objective in this chapter is this: to convince you that AI is already present
and constantly, radically improving; and that the threats and promises that AI brings
with it are not the threats and promises media and culture have focussed on, of motivated AI or superintelligence that of themselves starts competing with humans for
resources. Rather, AI is changing what collective agencies like governments, corporations and neighbourhoods can do. Perhaps even more insidiously, new affordances
of knowledge and communication also change what even we as individuals are inclined to do, what we largely-unconsciously think is worth our while. ‘Insidious’ is
not quite the right word here, because some of these effects will be positive, as when
communities organise to be safer and more robust. But the fact that our behaviour
can radically change without a shift in either explicit or implicit motivations—with
no deliberate decision to refocus—seems insidious, and may well be having negative
effects already.
As I indicated in Section 2, we are already in the process of finding out what
happens when our ability to read and predict the behaviour of our fellows constantly
improves, because this is the new situation in which we find ourselves, thanks to our
prosthetic intelligence. Assuming the output of commercial AI remains available
and accessible in price, then the models of the previous section tell us we should expect to find ourselves more and more operating at and influenced by the level of the
collective. Remember that this is not a simple recipe for world-wide peace. There
are many potential collectives, which compete for resources including our time, and
it is possible to over-invest in many, perhaps most public goods. The models of
Roughgarden and Taylor describe not systems of maximal cooperation, but rather
systems of maximising individual benefit from cooperation. There are still physical
and temporal limits to the number of people with whom we can best collaborate
for many human goals (Dunbar, 1992; Dunbar et al., 2009). We might nevertheless expect that our improved capacity to communicate and perceive can help us to

Artificial Intelligence and Pro-Social Behaviour

17

achieve levels of cooperation not previously possible for threats and opportunities
that truly operate at a species level, for example response to climate change or a new
pandemic.
Our hopes should be balanced and informed though also by our fears. One concern is that being suddenly offered new capacities may cause us to misappropriate
our individual investments of time and attention. This is because our capacity for cooperative behaviour is not entirely based on our deliberating intelligence or our individual capacity for plasticity and change. Learning, reasoning and evolution itself
are facilitated by the hard-coding of useful strategies into our genetic repertoire (Depew, 2003; Rolian, 2014; Kitano, 2004). For humans, experience is also compiled
into our unconscious skills and expectations. These are mechanisms that evolution
has found help us address the problems of combinatorics (see the first paragraph of
Section 4.2). But these same solutions leave us vulnerable for certain pathologies.
For example, a supernormal stimulus is a stimulus better able to trigger a behaviour
than any that occurred in the contexts in which the paired association between stimulus and response was learned or evolved (Tinbergen and Perdeck, 1950; Staddon,
1975). Supernormal stimuli can result from the situation where, while the behaviour
was being acquired, there was no context in which to evolve or learn a bound for the
expression of that behaviour, so no limits were learned. The term was invented by
Tinbergen to describe the behaviour of gull chicks, who would ordinarily peck the
red dot on their parent’s bill to be fed, but preferred the largest, reddest head they
could find over their actual parents’. Natural selection limits the amount of red an
adult gull would ever display, but not the types of artefacts an experimental scientist might create. Similarly, if a human drive for social stimulation (for example) is
better met by computer games than real people, then humans in a gaming context
might become increasingly isolated and have a reduced possibility to meet potential
mates. The successful use of search engines—quick access to useful information—
apparently causes a reduction in actual personal memory storage (Ward, 2013). This
effect may be mediated by the successful searcher’s increased estimation of cognitive self worth. Though Ward describes this new assessment as aberrant, it may in
fact be justified if Internet access is a reliable context.
The social consequences of most technology-induced supernormal stimuli will
presumably be relatively transient. Humans are learning machines—our conscious
attention, one-shot learning, and fantastic communicative abilities are very likely to
spread better-adapted behaviour soon after any such benign exploitation is stumbled
over. What may be more permanent is any shift between levels of agency in power,
action, and even thought as a consequence of the new information landscape. The
increased transparency of other people’s lives gives those in control more control,
whether those are parents, communities or school-yard bullies. But control in this
context is a tricky concept, linked also with responsibility. We may find ourselves
losing individual opportunities for decision making, as the agency of our collectives
become stronger, and their norms therefore more tightly enforced.
The dystopian scenarios this loss of individual-level agency might predict are not
limited to ones of governmental excess. Currently in British and American society,
children (including teenagers) are under unprecedented levels of chaperoning and

18

Joanna J. Bryson

‘protection’. Parents who ‘neglect’ their children by failing to police them for even
a few minutes can be and are being arrested (Brooks, 2014). Lee et al. (2010, special issue) document and discuss the massive increase over the last two decades in
variety as well as duration of tasks that are currently considered to be parenting. Lee
et al. suggest that what has changed is risk sensitivity, with every child rather than
only exceptional ones now being perceive as ‘at-risk’, by both parents and authorities. This may not be because of increased behavioural transparency afforded by
technology and AI. Another possible explanation is simply the increased value of
every human life due to economic growth (Pinker, 2011). But what what I propose
here is that the change is not so much in belief about the possibility of danger, as
the actuality of afforded control. Social policing is becoming easier and easier, so
we need only to assume a fixed level of motivation for such policing to expect the
amount of actual policing to increase.
Another form of AI-mediated social change that we can already observe is the
propensity of commercial and government organisations to get their customers or
users to replace their own employees. The training, vetting and supervision that previously had to be given to an employee can now be mostly encoded in a machine—
and the rest transferred to the users—via the use of automated kiosks. While the
machines we use to check out our groceries, retrieve our boarding cards and baggage tags, or purchase post office services may not seem particularly intelligent,
their perceptual skills and capacities for interaction are more powerful and flexible
than the older systems that needed to be operated by experts. Of course, they are
still not trivial to use, but the general population is becoming sufficiently expert in
their use to facilitate their replacement of human employees. And in acquiring this
expertise, we are again becoming more homogenous in our skill sets, and in the way
we spend that part of our time.
With AI public video surveillance our motions, gestures, and whereabouts can be
tracked; with speech recognition our telephone and video conversations can be transcribed. The fact some of us but not others spew information on social media will
rapidly be largely irrelevant. As better and better models are built relating any form
of personal expression (including purchases, travel, and communication partners)
to expected behaviour (including purchases, votes, demonstrations, and donations),
less and less information about any one person will be needed to predict their likely
behaviour (Jacobs et al., 1991; McLachlan and Krishnan, 2008; Hinton et al., 2006;
Le Roux and Bengio, 2008).
Although I’ve been discussing the likely homogenising impact of increased AI
and increased collective-level agency, collective agency is not necessarily egalitarian or even democratic. Again we can see this in nature and our models of the behaviours of animals very similar to us. In non-human primates, troops are described
as either ‘egalitarian’, where any troop member can protest treatment by any other,
and conflict is frequent but not violent; or as ‘despotic’, where interaction is limited
by the dominance hierarchy, aggression is unilateral from dominant to subordinate,
and fights while few are bloody (Thierry, 2007). Which structure a species uses is
partially determined by historic accident (phylogeny) (Shultz et al., 2011), but also
significantly by the species’ ecology. If a species’ preferred food source is defensi-

Artificial Intelligence and Pro-Social Behaviour

19

ble (e.g. fruit rather than insects) then a species will be more hierarchical, as it will
under the pressure for safer spatial positions produced by the presence of predators
(Sterck et al., 1997). The choice between social orders is not made by the individual
monkeys, but by the dynamics of their ecological context.
Similarly, we cannot say exactly the power dynamics we expect to see as a consequence of increasing agency at collective, social levels. However a worrying prediction might be drawn from Rawls (1980), whose theory mandates that a ‘veil of
ignorance’ is necessary to ensure ethical governance. Those in power should be under the impression that any law they make might apply to any citizen, including
themselves. Can such ignorance be maintained in an age of prosthetic intelligence?
If not, if those in power can better know the likely social position of themselves
and their children or even the likely outcome of elections (Wang et al., 2014b), how
will this affect our institutions? As uncertainty is reduced, can we ensure that those
in power will optimise for the global good, or will they be more motivated—and
able— to maintain control?
The answers to these questions are not deterministic. The models presented in
Section 4 make ranges of predictions based on interactions between variables, all of
which can change. Our future will be influenced by the institutions and regulations
we construct now, because these determine how easy it is to transition from one
context into another, just as available variation partially determines evolution by
determining what natural selection can select between (see footnote 9). Although
many futures may be theoretically achievable, in practice the institutions we put in
place now determine which futures are far more likely, and how soon these might
be attained.
Humans and human society have so far proved exceptionally resilient, presumably because of our individual, collective and prosthetic intelligence. But what we
know about social behaviour indicates significant policy priorities. If we want to
maintain flexibility, we should maintain variation in our populations. If we want
to maintain variation and independence in individual citizens’ behaviour, then we
should protect their privacy and even anonymity. Previously, most people were
anonymous due to obscurity. In its most basic form as absolute inaccessibility of
information, obscurity may never occur again (Hartzog and Stutzman, 2013). But
previously, people defended their homes with their own swords, walls and dogs.
Governments and other organisations and individuals are fully capable of invading
our homes and taking our property, but this is a relatively rare occurrence because
of the rule of law. Legal mandates of anonymity on stored data won’t make it impossible to build the general models that can be used to predict the behaviour of
individuals. But if we make this sort of behaviour illegal with sufficiently strong
sanctions, then we can reduce the extent to which organisations violate that law, or
at least limit their proclivity for publicly admitting (e.g. by acting on the information) that they have done so. If people have less reason to fear exposure of their
actions, this should reduce the inhibitory impact on individuals’ behaviour of our
improved intelligence.
Already both American and European courts are showing signs of recognising
that current legal norms have been built around assumptions of obscurity, and that

20

Joanna J. Bryson

these may need to be protected (Selinger and Hartzog, 2014). Court decisions may
not be a substitute though for both legislation and the technology to make these
choices realistically available. Legislating will not be easy. In Europe there has been
concern that the de facto mechanism of access to the public record has been removed as search engines have been forced not to associate newspaper articles with
individuals’ names when those individuals have asked to be disassociated from incidents which are entirely in the past (Powles, 2014). As we do come to rely on
our prosthetic intelligence and to consider those of our memories externalised to the
Internet to be our own, such cases of who owns access to which information will
become increasingly complex (G¨urses, 2010).
The evolution of language has allowed us all to know the concept of responsibility. Now we are moral agents—not only actors, but authors responsible for our
creations. As philosophers and scientists we have also professional obligations with
respect to considering and communicating the impacts of technology to our culture
(Wittkower et al., 2013). AI can help us understand the rapid changes and ecological dominance our species is experiencing. Yet that same understanding could
well mean that the rate of change will continue to accelerate. We need to be able
to rapidly create, negotiate and communicate coherent models of our dynamic societies and their priorities, to help these societies establish a sustainable future. I
have argued that the nature of our agency may fundamentally change as we gain
new insights through our prosthetic intelligence, resulting in new equlibria between
collective versus individual agency. I’ve also described scientific models showing
how these equlibria are established, and the importance of individual variation to
a robust, resilient, mutable society. I therefore recommend that we encourage both
legislatures and individual citizens to take steps to maintain privacy and defend both
group and individual eccentricity. Further, I recommend we all take both personal
and academic interest in our governance, so that we can help ensure the desirability
of the collectives we contribute to.
Acknowledgements Thanks to Lydia Harriss, Catrin Misselhorn, Miles Brundage and Evan
Selinger for encouragement and discussions; David Gunkel and Will Lowe for debate; Misselhorn, Brundage, Selinger and Robin Dunbar for comments on an earlier draft; and Thomas K¨onig
and the University of Mannheim SFB 884, The Political Economy of Reforms, for a quiet office to
work in.

References
Ackermann, Martin, B¨arbel Stecher, Nikki E. Freed, Pascal Songhet, Wolf-Dietrich
Hardt, and Michael Doebeli. 2008. Self-destructive cooperation mediated by phenotypic noise. Nature 454:987–990.
Arnold, E.. 2014. His Title. in this volume.
Atkinson, Quentin D. and Harvey Whitehouse. 2011. The cultural morphospace
of ritual form: Examining modes of religiosity cross-culturally. Evolution and

Artificial Intelligence and Pro-Social Behaviour

21

Human Behaviour 32:50–62.
Axelrod, Robert. 1997. The Complexity of Cooperation: Agent-Based Models of
Competition and Colloboration. Princeton University Press.
Barnosky, Anthony D.. 2008. Megafauna biomass tradeoff as a driver of Quaternary and future extinctions. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105:11543–11548.
Bate, Andrew M. and Frank M. Hilker. 2013. Predator–prey oscillations can shift
when diseases become endemic. Journal of Theoretical Biology 316:1–8.
Beauchamp, Nick. 2013. Predicting and Interpolating State-level Polling using
Twitter Textual Data. In New Directions in Analyzing Text as Data Workshop,
eds. Ken Benoit, Daniel Diermeier, and Arthur Spirling, LSE, pp. 23. preprint
available online in unpublished proceedings.
Bischof, R., H. Ali, M. Kabir, S. Hameed, and M. A. Nawaz. 2014. Being the underdog: an elusive small carnivore uses space with prey and time without enemies.
Journal of Zoology:n/a–n/a.
Bishop, Christopher M.. 2006. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. London:
Springer.
Bispham, John. 2006. Rhythm in Music: What is it? Who has it? And Why? Music
Perception 24:125–134.
Brooks, Kim. 2014. The day I left my son in the car. Salon.
Bryson, Joanna J.. 2008. Embodiment versus Memetics. Mind & Society 7:77–94.
Bryson, Joanna J.. 2009. Representations Underlying Social Learning and Cultural
Evolution. Interaction Studies 10:77–100.
Bryson, Joanna J. and Philip P. Kime. 2011. Just an Artifact: Why Machines are
Perceived as Moral Agents. In Proceedings of the 22nd International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Barcelona, pp. 1641–1646. Morgan Kaufmann.
Bryson, Joanna J., James Mitchell, and Simon T. Powers. 2014. Explaining Cultural
Variation in Public Goods Games. In Applied Evolutionary Anthropology: Darwinian Approaches to Contemporary World Issues, eds. M. A. Gibson and D. W.
Lawson, pp. 201–222. Heidelberg: Springer.
Burkart, J. M., O. Allon, F. Amici, C. Fichtel, C. Finkenwirth, A. Heschl, J. Huber, K. Isler, Z. K. Kosonen, E. Martins, E. J. Meulman, R. Richiger, K. Rueth,
B. Spillmann, S. Wiesendanger, and C. P. van Schaik. 2014. The evolutionary
origin of human hyper-cooperation. Nature Communications 5.
Carter, A. J., S. English, and T. H. Clutton-Brock. 2014. Cooperative personalities and social niche specialization in female meerkats. Journal of Evolutionary
Biology 27:815–825.
Chivers, Douglas P. and Maud C.O. Ferrari. 2014. Social learning of predators by
tadpoles: does food restriction alter the efficacy of tutors as information sources?
Animal Behaviour 89:93 – 97.
Christakis, Nicholas A. and James H. Fowler. 2014. Friendship and natural selection. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
Crockford, Catherine, RomanM. Wittig, Roger Mundry, and Klaus Zuberb¨uhler.
2012. Wild Chimpanzees Inform Ignorant Group Members of Danger. Current
Biology 22:142–146.

22

Joanna J. Bryson

Darwin, Charles. 1859. On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection.
London: John Murray.
Dawkins, Richard. 1976. The Selfish Gene. Oxford University Press.
Dawkins, Richard. 1982. The Extended Phenotype: The Gene as the Unit of Selection. W.H. Freeman & Company.
Dennett, Daniel C.. 2002. The New Replicators. In The Encyclopedia of Evolution,
ed. Mark Pagel, Volume 1, pp. E83–E92. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Depew, David J.. 2003. Baldwin and His Many Effects. In Evolution and Learning: The Baldwin Effect Reconsidered, eds. Bruce H. Weber and David J. Depew.
Bradford Books, MIT Press.
Derex, Maxime, Marie-Pauline Beugin, Bernard Godelle, and Michel Raymond.
2013. Experimental evidence for the influence of group size on cultural complexity. Nature 503:389–391.
Dimitriu, Tatiana, Chantal Lotton, Julien B´enard-Capelle, Dusan Misevic, Sam P.
Brown, Ariel B. Lindner, and Franc¸ois Taddei. 2014. Genetic information transfer promotes cooperation in bacteria. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences.
Dunbar, Robin I. M.. 1992. Time: A Hidden Constraint on the Behavioural Ecology
of Baboons. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 31:35–49.
Dunbar, Robin I. M.. 2002. Modelling Primate Behavioral Ecology. International
Journal of Primatology 23:785–819.
Dunbar, R. I. M., A. H. Korstjens, J. Lehmann, and British Academy Centenary Research Project. 2009. Time as an ecological constraint. Biological Reviews 84:413–429.
El Mouden, C., J.-B. Andr´e, O. Morin, and D. Nettle. 2014. Cultural transmission
and the evolution of human behaviour: a general approach based on the Price
equation. Journal of Evolutionary Biology 27:231–241.
Eliassen, Sigrunn and Christian Jørgensen. 2014. Extra-Pair Mating and Evolution
of Cooperative Neighbourhoods. PLoS ONE 9:e99878.
Eyben, Florian, Felix Weninger, Nicolas Lehment, Bj¨orn Schuller, and Gerhard
Rigoll. 2013. Affective Video Retrieval: Violence Detection in Hollywood
Movies by Large-Scale Segmental Feature Extraction. PLoS ONE 8:e78506.
Ferguson-Gow, Henry, Seirian Sumner, Andrew F. G. Bourke, and Kate E. Jones.
2014. Colony size predicts division of labour in attine ants. Proceedings of the
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 281.
Fisher, R. A.. 1930. The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection. Oxford University
Press.
Fitch, W. Tecumseh. 2000. The Evolution of Speech: A Comparative Review.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences 4:258–267.
Fitch, W. Tecumseh and Klaus Zuberb¨uhler. 2013. Primate precursors to human
language: beyond discontinuity. In The Evolution of Emotional Communication:
From Sounds in Nonhuman Mammals to Speech and Music in Man, eds. Eckart
Altenm¨uller, Sabine Schmidt, and Elke Zimmerman, pp. 26–48. Oxford University Press.

Artificial Intelligence and Pro-Social Behaviour

23

Folse, Henry J. and Joan Roughgarden. 2012. Direct Benefits of Genetic Mosaicism
and Intraorganismal Selection: Modeling Coevolution Between a Long-Lived
Tree and a Short-Lived Herbivore. Evolution 66:1091–1113.
Gardner, Andy and Stuart A. West. 2014. Inclusive fitness: 50 years on. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 369.
Gardner, A., S. A. West, and G. Wild. 2011. The genetical theory of kin selection.
Journal of Evolutionary Biology 24:1020–1043.
Gintis, Herbert, Samuel Bowles, Robert Boyd, and Ernst Fehr. 2005. Moral Sentiments and Material Interests: Origins, Evidence, and Consequences. In Moral
Sentiments and Material Interests: The Foundations of Cooperation in Economic
Life, eds. Herbert Gintis, Samuel Bowles, Robert Boyd, and Ernst Fehr, Chapter 1, pp. 3–39. Cambridge, MA: MIT.
Gray, Peter B., Justin R. Garcia, Benjamin S. Crosier, and Helen E. Fisher. 2014.
Dating and Sexual Behavior Among Single Parents of Young Children in the
United States. Journal of Sex Research 0:1–8. in press.
Griffin, Harry J., Min S. H. Aung, Bernardino Romera-Paredes, Ciaran McLoughlin,
Gary McKeown, William Curran, and Nadia Bianchi-Berthouze. 2013. Laughter
Type Recognition from Whole Body Motion. In Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction (ACII), 2013 Humaine Association Conference on, pp. 349–355.
Gunkel, David J.. 2012. The Machine Question: Critical Perspectives on AI, Robots,
and Ethics. The MIT Press.
G¨urses, Fahriye Seda. 2010. Multilateral privacy requirements analysis in online
social network services. Ph. D. thesis, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Department of Computer Science.
Haberl, Helmut, K. Heinz Erb, Fridolin Krausmann, Veronika Gaube, Alberte Bondeau, Christoph Plutzar, Simone Gingrich, Wolfgang Lucht, and Marina FischerKowalski. 2007. Quantifying and mapping the human appropriation of net primary production in earth’s terrestrial ecosystems. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 104:12942–12947.
Hamilton, W. D.. 1964. The Genetical Evolution of Social Behaviour. Journal of
Theoretical Biology 7:1–52.
Hamilton, W. D.. 1971. Geometry for the Selfish Herd. Journal of Theoretical
Biology 31:295–311.
Hartzog, Woodrow and Frederic Stutzman. 2013. Obscurity by Design. Washington
Law Review 88:385–418.
Henrich, J., R. Boyd, S. Bowles, C. Camerer, E. Fehr, H. Gintis, and R. McElreath.
2001. Cooperation, reciprocity and punishment in fifteen small-scale societies.
American Economic Review 91:73–78.
Herrmann, Benedikt, Christian Th¨oni, and Simon G¨achter. 2008a. Antisocial Punishment Across Societies. Science 319:1362–1367.
Herrmann, Benedikt, Christian Th¨oni, and Simon G¨achter. 2008b. Supporting
Online Material for Antisocial Punishment Across Societies. Science 319.
http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/319/5868/1362/DC1.
Hertz, John, Anders Krogh, and Richard G. Palmer. 1991. Introduction to the Theory
of Neural Computation. Redwood City, CA: Addison-Wesley.

24

Joanna J. Bryson

Hinton, G, S Osindero, and Y Teh. 2006. A Fast Learning Algorithm for Deep
Belief Nets. Neural Computation 18:1527–1554.
Hobaiter, Catherine, Anne Marijke Schel, Kevin Langergraber, and Klaus Zuberb¨uhler. 2014. ‘Adoption’ by Maternal Siblings in Wild Chimpanzees. PLoS
ONE 9:e103777.
Hofmann, Martin, J¨urgen Geiger, Sebastian Bachmann, Bj¨orn Schuller, and Gerhard
Rigoll. 2014. The TUM Gait from Audio, Image and Depth (GAID) database:
Multimodal recognition of subjects and traits. Journal of Visual Communication
and Image Representation 25:195–206.
Hogan, Kelly E. and Kate L. Laskowski. 2013. Indirect Information Transfer:
Three-Spined Sticklebacks Use Visual Alarm Cues From Frightened Conspecifics
About an Unseen Predator. Ethology:n/a–n/a.
Huang, Bidan, Sahar El-Khoury, Miao Li, Joanna J. Bryson, and Aude Billard. 2013.
Learning a Real Time Grasping Strategy. In IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Karlsruhe, Germany, pp. 593–600.
Inglehart, Ronald, Miguel Bas´a nez, Jaime D´ıez-Medrano, Lock Halman, and Ruud
Luijkx (Eds.). 2004. Human Beliefs and Values: A Cross-Cultural Sourcebook
Based on the 1999–2002 Values Surveys. M´exico. Siglo XXI Editores.
Jacobs, Robert A, Michael I Jordan, Steven J Nowlan, and Geoffrey E Hinton. 1991.
Adaptive mixtures of local experts. Neural computation 3:79–87.
Jaeggi, Adrian V., Maria A. van Noordwijk, and Carel P. van Schaik. 2007. Begging for Information: Mother–Offspring Food Sharing Among Wild Bornean
Orangutans. American Journal of Primatology.
Keller, Evelyn F. and Lee A. Segel. 1970. Initiation of slime mold aggregation
viewed as an instability. Journal of Theoretical Biology 26:399–415.
Keller, Laurent. 1999. Levels of selection in evolution. Princeton University Press.
Kitano, Hiroaki. 2004. Biological robustness. Nature Reviews Genetics 5:826–837.
Kleinsmith, Andrea and Nadia Bianchi-Berthouze. 2013. Affective Body Expression Perception and Recognition: A Survey. Affective Computing, IEEE Transactions on 4:15–33.
Kokko, Hanna. 2007. Modelling for Field Biologists and Other Interesting People.
Cambridge University Press.
Krosch, Amy R. and David M. Amodio. 2014. Economic scarcity alters the perception of race. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
Kr¨utzen, Michael, Janet Mann, Michael R. Heithaus, Richard C. Connor, Lars Bejder, and William B. Sherwin. 2005. Cultural transmission of tool use in bottlenose dolphins. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 102:8939–8943.
Lamba, Shakti and Ruth Mace. 2011. Demography and ecology drive variation in
cooperation across human populations. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 108:14426–14430.
Le Roux, Nicolas and Yoshua Bengio. 2008. Representational power of restricted
Boltzmann machines and deep belief networks. Neural Computation 20:1631–
1649.

Artificial Intelligence and Pro-Social Behaviour

25

Ledgard, Stewart F.. 2001. Nitrogen cycling in low input legume-based agriculture,
with emphasis on legume/grass pastures. Plant and Soil 228:43–59.
Lee, Ellie, Jan Macvarish, and Jennie Bristow. 2010. Risk, health and parenting
culture. Health, Risk & Society 12:293–300.
Leimgruber, Kristin L., Adrian F. Ward, Jane Widness, Michael I. Norton,
Kristina R. Olson, Kurt Gray, and Laurie R. Santos. 2014. Give What You Get:
Capuchin Monkeys (Cebus apella) and 4-Year-Old Children Pay Forward Positive and Negative Outcomes to Conspecifics. PLoS ONE 9:e87035.
Lopez De Mantaras, Ramon, David McSherry, Derek Bridge, David Leake, Barry
Smyth, Susan Craw, Boi Faltings, Mary Lou Maher, Michael T Cox, Kenneth
Forbus, Mark Keane, Agnar Aamodt, and Ian Watson. 2005. Retrieval, reuse,
revision and retention in case-based reasoning. The Knowledge Engineering Review 20:215–240.
MacLean, R. Craig, Ayari Fuentes-Hernandez, Duncan Greig, Laurence D. Hurst,
and Ivana Gudelj. 2010. A Mixture of “Cheats” and “Co-Operators” Can Enable
Maximal Group Benefit. PLoS Biol 8:e1000486.
Margulis, Lynn and Gregory Hinkle. 1997. The Biota and Gaia. In Slanted Truths,
pp. 207–220. Springer New York.
Marshall, James A. R.. 2011. Ultimate causes and the evolution of altruism. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 65:503–512. 10.1007/s00265-010-1110-1.
Marshall, J. A. R., R. Bogacz, A. Dornhaus, R. Planqu´e, T. Kovacs, and N. R.
Franks. 2009. On optimal decision-making in brains and social insect colonies.
Journal of the Royal Society Interface 6:1065–1074.
McComb, Karen, Cynthia Moss, Sarah M. Durant, Lucy Baker, and Soila Sayialel.
2001. Matriarchs As Repositories of Social Knowledge in African Elephants.
Science 292:491–494.
McLachlan, Geoffrey and Thriyambakam Krishnan. 2008. The EM algorithm and
extensions, Volume 382. John Wiley & Sons.
Mesoudi, Alex, Andrew Whiten, and Kevin N. Laland. 2004. Is Human Cultural
Evolution Darwinian? Evidence Reviewed from the Perspective of the Origin of
Species. Evolution 58:1–11.
Okasha, Samir. 2012. Social Justice, Genomic Justice and the Veil of Ignorance:
Harsanyi Meets Mendel. Economics and Philosophy 28:43–71.
Perry, Susan. 2011. Social traditions and social learning in capuchin monkeys
(Cebus). Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 366:988–996.
Perry, Susan and J. H. Manson. 2003. Traditions in Monkeys. Evolutionary Anthropology 12:71–81.
Pinker, Steven. 2011. The Better Angels of our Nature: The Decline of Violence in
History and Its Causes. Penguin.
Powers, Simon T., Alexandra S. Penn, and Richard A. Watson. 2011. The concurrent evolution of cooperation and the population structures that support it. Evolution 65:1527–1543.

26

Joanna J. Bryson

Powers, Simon T., Daniel J. Taylor, and Joanna J. Bryson. 2012. Punishment can
promote defection in group-structured populations. Journal of Theoretical Biology 311:107–116.
Powles, Julia. 2014. What we can salvage from ‘right to be forgotten’ ruling. Wired.
Prediger, Sebastian, Bj¨orn Vollan, and Benedikt Herrmann. 2013. Resource
Scarcity, Spite and Cooperation. Working Papers 227, Giga.
Preuschoft, Signe and Carel P. van Schaik. 2000. Dominance and Communication:
Conflict Management in Various Social Settings. In Natural Conflict Resolution,
eds. Filippo Aureli and Frans B. M. de Waal, Chapter 6, pp. 77–105. University
of California Press.
Price, George R.. 1972. Fisher’s ‘fundamental theorem’ made clear. Annals of
Human Genetics 36:129–140.
Rand, D. G., J. J. Armao IV, M. Nakamaru, and H. Ohtsuki. 2010. Anti-social
punishment can prevent the co-evolution of punishment and cooperation. Journal
of Theoretical Biology 265:624–632.
Rankin, D. J., E. P. C. Rocha, and S. P. Brown. 2010. What traits are carried on
mobile genetic elements, and why? Heredity 106:1–10.
Rawls, John. 1980. Kantian Constructivism in Moral Theory. The Journal of Philosophy 77:pp. 515–572.
Roberts, S. Craig and Jan Havlicek. 2011. Evolutionary psychology and perfume
design. In Applied Evolutionary Psychology, ed. S. Craig Roberts, Chapter 20,
pp. 330–348. Oxford University Press.
Rolian, Campbell. 2014. Genes, development, and evolvability in primate evolution.
Evolutionary Anthropology: Issues, News, and Reviews 23:93–104.
Rosenbaum, Sara. 2014. When Religion Meets Workers’ Rights: Hobby Lobby and
Conestoga Wood Specialties. Milbank Quarterly 92:202–206.
Roughgarden, Joan. 2012. Teamwork, pleasure and bargaining in animal social
behaviour. Journal of Evolutionary Biology 25:1454–1462.
Roughgarden, Joan, Meeko Oishi, and Erol Akay. 2006. Reproductive Social Behavior: Cooperative Games to Replace Sexual Selection. Science 311:965–969.
Schaal, Stefan and Christopher G. Atkeson. 1998. Constructive incremental learning
from only local information. Neural Computation 10:2047–2084.
Schroeder, Kari Britt, Gillian V. Pepper, and Daniel Nettle. 2014. Local norms of
cheating and the cultural evolution of crime and punishment: a study of two urban
neighborhoods. PeerJ 2:e450.
Selinger, Evan and Woodrow Hartzog. 2014. Obscurity and Privacy. In Routledge
Companion to Philosophy of Technology, eds. Joseph Pitt and Ashley Shew. New
York, NY: Routledge. in press.
Seth, A. K., T. J. Prescott, and J. J. Bryson (Eds.). 2012. Modelling Natural Action
Selection. Cambridge University Press.
Shannon, Claude E.. 2001. A mathematical theory of communication. ACM SIGMOBILE Mobile Computing and Communications Review 5:3–55.
Shultz, Susanne and Laura V. Finlayson. 2010. Large body and small brain and
group sizes are associated with predator preferences for mammalian prey. Behavioral Ecology 21:1073–1079.

Artificial Intelligence and Pro-Social Behaviour

27

Shultz, Susanne, Christopher Opie, and Quentin D. Atkinson. 2011. Stepwise evolution of stable sociality in primates. Nature 479:219–222.
Silva, Antonio S. and Ruth Mace. 2014. Cooperation and conflict: Field experiments
in Northern Ireland. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 281.
Skemp, Richard R.. 1961. Reflective Intelligence and Mathematics. British Journal
of Educational Psychology 31:45–55.
Smith, Kenny and Simon Kirby. 2008. Cultural evolution: implications for understanding the human language faculty and its evolution. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 363:3591–3603.
Sober, Elliott and David Sloan Wilson. 1998. Unto Others: The Evolution and
Psychology of Unselfish Behavior. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Staddon, J. E. R.. 1975. A Note on the Evolutionary Significance of ”Supernormal”
Stimuli. The American Naturalist 109:pp. 541–545.
Sterck, E. H. M., D. P. Watts, and C. P. van Schaik. 1997. The evolution of female
social relationships in nonhuman primates. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 41:291–309.
Stoddart, David Michael. 1990. The Scented Ape: The Biology and Culture of Human Odour. Cambridge University Press.
Sylwester, Karolina, Benedikt Herrmann, and Joanna J. Bryson. 2013. Homo homini
lupus? Explaining antisocial punishment. Journal of Neuroscience, Psychology,
and Economics 6:167–188.
Sylwester, Karolina, James Mitchell, and Joanna J. Bryson. 2014. Punishment as
aggression: Uses and consequences of costlypu nishment across populations. to
be resubmitted.
Sytch, Maxim and Adam Tatarynowicz. 2014. Friends and Foes: The Dynamics of
Dual Social Structures. Academy of Management Journal 57:585–613.
Taylor, Daniel J.. 2014. Evolution of the Social Contract. in prep.
Taylor, Daniel J. and Joanna J. Bryson. 2014. A New Model of The Evolution
of Economic Exchange: Quasi-Public Goods in the Context of Food Sharing.
submitted.
Thierry, Bernard. 2007. Unity in Diversity: Lessons from Macaque Societies. Evolutionary Anthropology 16:224–238.
Tinbergen, N. and A. C. Perdeck. 1950. On the Stimulus Situation Releasing the
Begging Response in the Newly Hatched Herring Gull Chick (Larus Argentatus
Argentatus Pont.). Behaviour 3:pp. 1–39.
Trewavas, Anthony. 2005. Green plants as intelligent organisms. Trends in plant
science 10:413–419.
Valstar, Michel F. and Maja Pantic. 2012. Fully Automatic Recognition of the Temporal Phases of Facial Actions. Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B: Cybernetics, IEEE Transactions on 42:28–43.
van Doorn, Gerrit Sander and Michael Taborsky. 2012. The Evolution of Generalized Reciprocity on Social Interaction Networks. Evolution 66:651–664.
Vernon, D., G. Metta, and G. Sandini. 2007. A Survey of Artificial Cognitive
Systems: Implications for the Autonomous Development of Mental Capabili-

28

Joanna J. Bryson

ties in Computational Agents. Evolutionary Computation, IEEE Transactions
on 11:151–180.
Voter, The Mythical Swing. 2014. David Rothschild and Sharad Goel and Andrew
Gelman and Douglas Rivers. In Collective Intelligence, MIT, pp. 22. unpublished
preprint presented at conference.
Wang, Wei, David Rothschild, Sharad Goel, and Andrew Gelman. 2014a. Forecasting Elections with Non-Representative Polls. In Collective Intelligence, MIT, pp.
21. unpublished conference proceedings.
Wang, Wei, David Rothschild, Sharad Goel, and Andrew Gelman. 2014b. Forecasting elections with non-representative polls. International Journal of Forecasting.
in press.
Ward, Adrian F.. 2013. Supernormal: How the Internet Is Changing Our Memories
and Our Minds. Psychological Inquiry 24:341–348.
Whitehouse, Harvey, Ken Kahn, Michael E. Hochberg, and Joanna J. Bryson. 2012.
The role for simulations in theory construction for the social sciences: Case
studies concerning Divergent Modes of Religiosity. Religion, Brain & Behavior 2:182–224.
Whiten, A., J. Goodall, W. C. McGew, T. Nishida, V. Reynolds, Y. Sugiyama,
C. E. G. Tutin, R. W. Wrangham, and C. Boesch. 1999. Cultures in Chimpanzees.
Nature 399:682–685.
Williams Woolley, Anita, Christopher F. Chabris, Alex Pentland, Nada Hashmi, and
Thomas W. Malone. 2010. Evidence for a Collective Intelligence Factor in the
Performance of Human Groups. Science 330:686–688.
Wilson, David Sloan. 1989. Levels of selection: An alternative to individualism in
biology and the human sciences. Social Networks 11:257–272. Special Issue on
Non-Human Primate Networks.
Wittkower, D. E., Evan Selinger, and Lucinda Rush. 2013. Public Philosophy of
Technology: Motivations, Barriers, and Reforms. Techn´e: Research in Philosophy
and Technology 17:179–200.
Wray, Alison. 1998. Protolanguage as a holistic system for social interaction. Language and Communication 18:47–67.
Wray, Alison and George W. Grace. 2007. The consequences of talking to strangers:
Evolutionary corollaries of socio-cultural influences on linguistic form. Lingua 117:543 – 578. The Evolution of Language.
Zahavi, Amotz. 1977. The testing of a bond. Animal Behaviour 25:246–247.

