Vol-1, Issue-2 PP. 155-158

ISSN: 2394-5788

CEO: Different Reviews on PhD in Artificial
Intelligence

Satish Gajawada
INDIA

ABSTRACT
Thanks to everyone who helped me to reach the stage where I am now. Recently, a new optimization method,
„PhD: The Human Optimization‟ has been proposed in the Artificial Intelligence field. This paper gives
different reviews of different experts on „PhD‟ in Artificial Intelligence. The nick name of this work is „CEO‟.

Keywords: Different; Reviews; PhD; Artificial Intelligence; The Human Optimization.

1.

Introduction

There are various papers in literature in which new algorithms were proposed. For example in [1] Vinayaka was
proposed. But there are no papers which give several reviews of different experts for the same algorithm
proposed. This paper is an attempt in this direction.

2.

Different Reviews

This section gives various reviews of several experts for the recently proposed „PhD‟ method in [2].
The abstract of PhD method proposed in [2] is “This paper is dedicated to everyone who is interested in the
Artificial Intelligence. In the past, researchers have explored behavior of chromosomes, birds, fishes, ants,
bacteria, bees and so on to create excellent optimization methods for solving complex optimization problems.
The author proposed the Human Optimization in this paper. Humans progressed like anything. They help each
other. There are so many plus points in Humans. In fact all optimization algorithms based on other beings are
created by Humans. There is so much to explore in behavior of Human for creating awesome optimization
algorithms. Artificial Fishes, birds, ants, bees etc have solved optimization problems. Similarly, optimization
method based on Humans is expected to solve complex problems. This paper sets the trend for all optimization
algorithms that come in future based on Humans.”

A Review 1
This paper studies a so-called human optimization method which falls into the research topic of optimization.
The proposed method was presented on the first page followed by some discussions. The paper clearly makes no

155 | P a g e

3 0 December 2 0 1 4

www.gjar.org

Vol-1, Issue-2 PP. 155-158

ISSN: 2394-5788

novel contribution to the state of the art on optimization algorithms and techniques. Thus, because of this lack of
new contribution, the paper is not appropriate for the conference.

B Review 2
Based on the review of your abstract, the following editorial comments should be taken into consideration:
Please
submit
an
abstract.
Change
font
type.
Remove PhD from
the
title.
Please follow the abstract guidelines.

C Review 3
Nothing to evaluate.

D Review 4
Funny paper, especially the notion of "love array" :)

E Review 5
This is not a research paper. It should not have been submitted for
Rationale and results are completely lacking. I do not even think there is a research idea in there.

review.

F Review 6
General conclusion is ‘Accept without reservation‟.
Further comments of the evaluator are below:
The title should be changed to be more comprehensive. The clarity and relevance of the problem is well stated.
How is the problem scientifically analyzed through the text? the main propositions of the paper are crystal clear.
The conclusion part should also contain more details expressing if other researches in the field support the
results. The text needs to be re-considered by a native English speaker to edit the errors. It is recommended that
the author adds more sources since the year 2012. the research method should be explained in more details.

G Review 7
General conclusion is ‘Accept without reservation‟.
Further comments of the evaluator are below:
The title is well in accord with the body of the text. The clarity and relevance of the problem is well stated. How
is the problem scientifically analyzed through the text? Reasoning of main propositions are satisfying. In
conclusion part, It is needed to support the result of the research by other recent researches. The English
language needs little modification in abstract part. The references are good but it is recommended that the author
uses more references from the recent years. The author needs to make the main goals crystal clear.

H Review 8
Paper has been ACCEPTED.
Specific behavior of the human has to be specified for the model.
Few Examples/scenarios where this could be applied has to be explained.
The time complexity of the optimization algorithm has to be demonstrated over the brute force method.
Initialization of Guidance location and generalized form of updating the guidance location/love array should be
explained in detail with appropriate formula.
Paper is very abstract about the idea discussed.

156 | P a g e

3 0 December 2 0 1 4

www.gjar.org

Vol-1, Issue-2 PP. 155-158

I

ISSN: 2394-5788

Review 9

Main advantages of the work:
1. Rather conceptual work pondering another interesting approach to optimization problem solution.
Goals are clearly stated and the new algorithm is provided and explained.
Main disadvantages of the work:
1. Qualitative comparison to other optimization algorithms is not provided. Why proposed algorithm
could be thought as specifically modeling human optimization is not fully explicated.
2. It is not clearly stated whether Guidance Locations and Love array are local or global, i.e. are they
vectors or matrices? Seems like the latter.
Decision: this paper should be accepted for participation in the conference

J

Review 10

Main advantages of the work:
1. New method for the creation of innovative optimization algorithms is proposed in the work.
2. The function Update Locations of Humans in optimization algorithm explained in depth.
3. An overview of existing works on the same topic is provided.
4. Calculations of the fitness values of guidance locations of the Human are analyzed.
Main disadvantages of the work:
1. It is not demonstrated how PhD method have been applied for solving complex optimization problems.
2. It is not clear either there are some software implementation of Human Optimization that confirm
practical feasibility of the method.
Decision: this paper should be accepted for participation in the conference

K Review 11
Review 11 a: A very interesting paper.
Review 11 b: I have to admit that I had a hard time grasping the key concepts revealed in this manuscript. The
author has set a very ambitious goal. But I am still searching for the elements that will make this goal a reality.
The proposed algorithm is simply too abstract to be of substantial value.

157 | P a g e

3 0 December 2 0 1 4

www.gjar.org

Vol-1, Issue-2 PP. 155-158

ISSN: 2394-5788

Table 1. Different Review results of PhD.
Review

Accepted/Rejected

Review 1
Review 2
Review 3
Review 4
Review 5
Review 6
Review 7
Review 8
Review 9
Review 10
Review 11

Rejected
Accepted
Rejected
Rejected
Rejected
Accepted
Accepted
Accepted
Accepted
Accepted
Accepted

Table 1. above shows the status (accepted/rejected) of PhD in different reviews from several experts.

3.

Conclusion

It has been observed from some reviews that PhD method is rejected whereas from other reviews PhD method is
accepted. It can be observed from few reviews that PhD method is funny and there is no research and nothing to
evaluate while from other reviews it can be observed that PhD method is innovative and interesting. Thanks to
all researchers who are giving efforts in the Artificial Intelligence field.

4.

REFERENCES

[1].

Satish Gajawada and Durga Toshniwal, Vinayaka : A Semi-Supervised Projected Clustering Method
Using Differential Evolution. International Journal of Software Engineering & Applications (IJSEA),
Vol.3, No.4, July 2012.

[2].

Satish Gajawada, PhD: The Human Optimization. Third International Scientific Conference of
Students, and Young Scientists "Theoretical and applied aspects of cybernetics", November 2013.

158 | P a g e

3 0 December 2 0 1 4

www.gjar.org

