ISSN: 2277-3754
ISO 9001:2008 Certified
International Journal of Engineering and Innovative Technology (IJEIT)
Volume 4, Issue 10, April 2015

Artificial Intelligence and its Application in
Different Areas
Avneet Pannu, M. Tech Student
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
DAV Institute of Engineering and Technology, Jalandhar India
logics). AI technologies have matured to the point in
offering real practical benefits in many of their
applications. Major Artificial Intelligence areas are
Expert Systems, Natural Language Processing, Speech
Understanding, Robotics and Sensory Systems, Computer
Vision and Scene Recognition, Intelligent ComputerAided Instruction, Neural Computing. From these Expert
System is a rapidly growing technology which is having a
huge impact on various fields of life. The various
techniques applied in artificial intelligence are Neural
Network, Fuzzy Logic, Evolutionary Computing, and
Hybrid Artificial Intelligence.

Abstract: In the future, intelligent machines will replace or
enhance human capabilities in many areas.
Artificial
intelligence is the intelligence exhibited by machines or
software. It is the subfield of computer science. Artificial
Intelligence is becoming a popular field in computer science
as it has enhanced the human life in many areas. Artificial
intelligence in the last two decades has greatly improved
performance of the manufacturing and service systems. Study
in the area of artificial intelligence has given rise to the
rapidly growing technology known as expert system.
Application areas of Artificial Intelligence is having a huge
impact on various fields of life as expert system is widely used
these days to solve the complex problems in various areas as
science, engineering, business, medicine, weather forecasting.
The areas employing the technology of Artificial Intelligence
have seen an increase in the quality and efficiency. This paper
gives an overview of this technology and the application areas
of this technology. This paper will also explore the current use
of Artificial Intelligence technologies in the PSS design to
damp the power system oscillations caused by interruptions, in
Network Intrusion for
protecting computer
and
communication networks from intruders, in the medical areamedicine, to improve hospital inpatient care, for medical
image classification, in the accounting databases to mitigate
the problems of it and in the computer games.

Fig 1. Papers published on different Artificial Intelligence
Techniques used [10]

Artificial intelligence has the advantages over the
natural intelligence as it is more permanent, consistent,
less expensive, has the ease of duplication and
dissemination, can be documented and can perform
certain tasks much faster and better than the human.
The Turing Test Approach: The Turing test was
proposed Alan Turing (1950) .This test was designed to
test that whether a particular machine can think or not.
The test involves a human interrogator who interacts with
a human and with a machine and has to tell who is human
and which one is machine. The computer passes the test if
an interrogator after posing some written questions,
cannot tell whether the written response is coming from
human or from the machine.

Keywords: Artificial Intelligence, Intrusion Detection
Systems, Neural Networks (computer), Power System
Stabilizer.

I. INTRODUCTION
It is claimed that artificial intelligence is playing an
increasing role in the research of management science
and operational research areas. Intelligence is commonly
considered as the ability to collect knowledge and reason
about knowledge to solve complex problems. In the near
Future intelligent machines will replace human
capabilities in many areas. Artificial intelligence is the
study and developments of intelligent machines and
software that can reason, learn, gather knowledge,
communicate, manipulate and perceive the objects. John
McCarthy coined the term in 1956 as branch of computer
science concerned with making computers behave like
humans. It is the study of the computation that makes it
possible to perceive reason and act. Artificial intelligence
is different from psychology because it emphasis on
computation and is different from computer science
because of its emphasis on perception, reasoning and
action. It makes machines smarter and more useful. It
works with the help of artificial neurons (artificial neural
network) and scientific theorems (if then statements and

II. AREAS OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
A. Language understanding: The ability to "understand"
and respond to the natural language. To translate from
spoken language to a written form and to translate from
one natural language to another natural language.
1.1 Speech Understanding
1.2 Semantic Information Processing (Computational
Linguistics)
1.3 Question Answering
1.4 Information Retrieval
1.5 Language Translation

79

ISSN: 2277-3754
ISO 9001:2008 Certified
International Journal of Engineering and Innovative Technology (IJEIT)
Volume 4, Issue 10, April 2015
B. Learning and adaptive systems: The ability to adapt
III. APPLICATIONS OF ARTIFICIAL
behavior baged on previous experience, and to develop
INTELLIGENCE
general rules concerning the world based on such
A. Application of Artificial Intelligent Techniques in
experience.
Power system stabilizers (PSSs) Design
2.1 Cybernetics
Since the 1960s, PSSs have been used to add damping
2.2 Concept Formation
to electromechanical oscillations. The PSS is an
additional control system, which is often applied as a part
C. Problem solving: Ability to formulate a problem in a
of an excitation control system. The basic function of the
suitable representation, to plan for its solution and to
PSS is to apply a signal to the excitation system,
know when new information is needed and how to obtain
producing electrical torques to the rotor in phase with
it.
speed differences that damp out power oscillations. They
3.1 Inference (Resolution-Based Theorem Proving,
perform within the generator‟s excitation system to create
Plausible Inference and Inductive Inference)
a part of electrical torque, called damping torque,
3.2 Interactive Problem Solving
proportional to speed change. A CPSS can be modeled by
3.3 Automatic Program Writing
a two stage (identical), lead-lag network which is
3.4 Heuristic Search
represented by a gain K and two time constants T1 and
T2. This network is connected with a washout circuit of a
D. Perception (visual): The ability to analyze a sensed
time constant Tw. The signal washout block acts as a
scene by relating it to an internal model which represents
high-pass filter with the time constant Tw that allows the
the perceiving organism's "knowledge of the world." The
signal associated with the oscillations in rotor speed to
result of this analysis is a structured set of relationships
pass unchanged. Furthermore, it does not allow the
between entities in the scene.
steady state changes to modify the terminal voltages. The
4.1 Pattern Recognition
phase compensation blocks with time constants T1i – T4i
4.2 Scene Analysis
supply the suitable phase-lead characteristics to
compensate the phase lag between the input and the
E. Modeling: The ability to develop an internal
output signals. The commonly used structure of the PSS
representation and set of transformation rules which can
is shown in Fig [10].
be used to predict the behavior and relationship between
some set of real-world objects or entities.
5.1 The Representation Problem for Problem Solving
Systems
5.2 Modeling Natural Systems (Economic, Sociological,
Ecological, Biological etc.)
Fig 2. Structure of PSS [10]
5.3 Hobot World Modeling (Perceptual and Functional
In the field of power system operation computer
Representations)
programs are executed and modified frequently according
to any variations. Artificial intelligence (AI) has the
F. Robots: A combination of most or all of the above
ability to deal with the high non-linearity of practical
abilities with the ability to move over terrain and
Systems. The various technologies that are used in PSSs
manipulate objects.
optimization problems are ANN, FL, ES etc.
6.1 Exploration
6.2 Transportation/Navigation
1.1) Artificial Neural Network (ANN) in PSS: In the
6.3 Industrial Automation (e.g., Process Control,
power systems the most applications of the artificial
Assembly Tasks, Executive Tasks)
neural network use a multilayer feed forward network. In
6.4 Security
the neural adaptive PSS, a feed-forward neural network
6.5 Other (Agriculture, Fishing, Mining, Sanitation,
with a single hidden layer is proposed which includes two
Construction, etc.)
sub networks: adaptive neuro-identifier, in which the
6.6 Military
dynamic characteristics of the plant are tracked and
6.7 Household
adaptive neurocontroller to damp the low frequency
oscillations. Radial basis function network (RBFN) has
G. Games: The ability to accept a formal set of rules for
three layers: input layers, hidden layers, and output
games such as Chess, Go, Kalah, Checkers, etc., and to
layers. The hidden layer find centers and widths of the
translate these rules into a representation or structure
radial basis functions for individual pattern units and the
which allows problem-solving and learning abilities to be
output layer finds the weights between the pattern units
used in reaching an adequate level of performance.
and the output units using an unsupervised learning
7.1 Particular Games (Chess, Go, Bridge, etc.) [11]
algorithm. A recurrent neural network (RNN)
stabilization controller is proposed to improve the

80

ISSN: 2277-3754
ISO 9001:2008 Certified
International Journal of Engineering and Innovative Technology (IJEIT)
Volume 4, Issue 10, April 2015
transient stability of power systems in which both the
and TCP dump raw data. The data set contains 24 attack
governor and AVR is used. The weight of the proposed
types. The attacks fall into four main categories viz.
controller is adjusted on-line. The signal output of the
Denial of Service (DOS), Remote to User (R2L), User to
first RNN is added to the PSS signal output for excitation
Root (U2R), and Probing. From the results, it was shown
control. The signal output of the second RNN is used as a
that the Fuzzy Inference System was faster in training,
stabilizing signal for the governor system. ANNs are
taking few seconds, than the Artificial Neural Networks
intelligent controllers to control nonlinear, dynamic
which took few minutes to converge. Generally, both
systems through learning, which can easily accommodate
techniques proved to be good, but with the Fuzzy
the nonlinearities and time dependencies.
Inference System having an edge over Artificial Neural
Networks with its higher classification accuracies. Their
1.2) Fuzzy Logic (FL) in PSS: In 1964, Lotfi Zadeh
experiment also showed the importance of variable
developed FL to address inaccuracy and uncertainty
selection, as the two techniques performed worse when
which usually exist in engineering problems [10]. A
all the variables were used without selection of the
design process for a fuzzy logic based PSS (FLPSS) was
variables. Good results were recorded when a subset
proposed for a multi-machine power system. The input
(about 40%) of the variables were used [12].
signal to FLPSS is the speed deviation of the synchronous
generator and its derivative. For the robustness of the
c) Application of Artificial Intelligence Techniques in
FLPSS, five generator power systems were used and for
Medical Area
designing a normalized sum-squared deviation index
Artificial intelligence techniques have the potential to
were used. This A novel input signal based FLPSS was
be applied in almost every field of medical area.
applied in the multi-machine environment.
3.1) Artificial Intelligence in Medicine
3.1.1) Fuzzy Expert Systems in Medicine: Fuzzy logic
is a data handling methodology that permits ambiguity
B) Application of Artificial Intelligence Techniques in
and hence is particularly suited to medical applications. It
Network Intrusion Detection
Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) uses the various
captures and uses the concept of fuzziness in a
Artificial Intelligence techniques for protecting computer
computationally effective manner. The most likely area of
and communication networks from intruders. Intrusion
application for this theory lies in medical diagnostics and,
Detection System (IDS) is the process of monitoring the
to a lesser extent, in the description of biological
events occurring in network and detecting the signs of
systems[14].Fuzzy expert systems use the structure of a
intrusion.
series of „if – then‟ rules for modeling.
2.1) Artificial Neural Network in IDS: ANN is a
mathematical model that consists of an interconnected
group of artificial neurons which processes the
information. In IDS ANN are used to model complex
relationships between inputs and outputs or to find
patterns in data. In this a neuron calculates the sum by
multiplying input by weight and applies a threshold. The
result is transmitted to subsequent neurons. Basically, the
ANN has been generalized to: [6]

Fig 3. A typical fuzzy rule system. [1]

The techniques of fuzzy logic have been explored in
many medical applications. Fuzzy logic is preferred over
the multiple logistic regression analysis in diagnosing
lung cancer using tumour marker profiles. Fuzzy logic is
also used in the diagnosis of acute leukaemia and breast
and pancreatic cancer and also predict patients‟ survival
with breast cancer. They can also characterize MRI
images of brain tumours ultrasound images of the breast,
ultrasound. Fuzzy logic controllers have been designed
for the administration of vasodilators in the peri-operative
period to control blood pressure.

yi=f(∑wikxk+µi)
(1)
k
Where wik are weights attached to the inputs, xk are
inputs to the neuron i, μi is a threshold, f (•) is a transfer
function and yi is the output of the neuron.
2.2) Fuzzy Inference Systems (FIS) in IDS: Sampada
et al [12] proposed two machine learning paradigms:
Artificial Neural Networks and Fuzzy Inference System,
for the design of an Intrusion Detection System. They
used SNORT to perform real time traffic analysis and
packet logging on IP network during the training phase of
the system. They constructed a signature pattern database
using Protocol Analysis and Neuro-Fuzzy learning
method. They then tested and validated the models using
the 1998 DARPA Intrusion Detection Evaluation Data

3.1.2) Evolutionary Computation in Medicine:
Evolutionary computation is the general term for several
computational techniques based on natural evolution
process that imitates the mechanism of natural selection
and survival of the fittest in solving real-world problems.
The most widely used form of evolutionary computation
for medical applications are „Genetic Algorithms‟ [8].
„Genetic Algorithms‟ based on the natural biological

81

ISSN: 2277-3754
ISO 9001:2008 Certified
International Journal of Engineering and Innovative Technology (IJEIT)
Volume 4, Issue 10, April 2015
evolution are the most widely used form of evolutionary
dimensional classification method was proposed. This
computation for medical applications. The principles of
method had good time consuming rate and classification
Genetic algorithms have been used to predict outcome in
accuracy. Another intelligent classification technique
critically ill patients. MRI segmentation of brain tumours
proposed was Least Squares Support Vector Machines
to measure the efficacy of treatment strategies is also
(LS-SVM). It identifies normal and abnormal slices of
done through evolutionary computation. They have also
brain MRI data. This technique had a higher accuracy of
been used in computerized analysis of mammographic
classification over other classifiers as the false negative in
micro calcification.
LS-SVM was very low compared. Due to automatic
defects detection in MR images of brain, extensive
research is being performed.
3.2) Using Artificial Intelligence to Improve Hospital
Inpatient Care: Clinical decision support systems
(CDSS) were one of the first successful applications of
D) Application of Artificial Intelligence in
AI, focusing
Accounting Databases:
Primarily on the diagnosis of a patient‟s condition
The use of artificial intelligence is investigated as the
given his symptoms and demographic information
basis to mitigate the problems of accounting databases.
[4].Mycin a rule-based expert system for identifying
The following are some difficulties with existing
bacteria causing infections and recommending antibiotics
accounting database systems.
to treat these infections was developed in 1970 under the
The needs of decision makers are not met by
work of CDSS for medical diagnosis. Pathfinder, which
accounting information. Humans do not understand or
used Bayesian networks to help pathologists more
cannot process the computerized accounting databases.
accurately diagnose lymph-node diseases. AI has also
Systems are not easy to use. There is focus on the
been useful for computer-aided detection of tumors in
numeric data.
medical images. Such approaches help in the diagnosis of
Integrating intelligent systems with accounting
various forms of cancer, and congenital heart defects.
databases can assist (either with the decision maker or
independent of decision maker) in the investigation of
large volumes of data with or without direct participation
3.3) Artificial Intelligence Approaches for Medical
Image Classification: Artificial intelligence techniques
of the decision maker. Thus, the systems can analyze the
are used for diagnostic sciences in biomedical image
data and assist the users understanding or interpreting
classification. Model-based intelligent analysis and
transactions to determine what accounting events are
decision-support tools are important in medical imaging
captured by the system [5].With the artificial intelligence
for computer-assisted diagnosis and evaluation. CAD
we store and retrieve knowledge in natural language.
helps radiologist who uses the output from a
There are some artificial intelligence tools or techniques
computerized analysis of medical images as a second
that help in the broader understanding of events captured
opinion in detecting lesions, assessing extent of disease,
by the accounting system. There is more emphasis on
and improving the accuracy and consistency of
symbolic or text data rather than just numeric data to
radiological diagnosis to reduce the rate of false negative
capture context. The artificial intelligence and expert
cases [12].
system builds intelligence into the database to assist
users. Without users direct participation such models help
the users by sorting through large quantities of data. Such
3.3.1) Artificial Neural Networks Approach on
Diagnostic Science: The following subsections will
models also assist the decision makers under time
discuss how ANN is utilized for image classification over
constraints; suggest alternatives in the searching and
generations.
evaluation of data.
3.3.1.1) Endoscopic Images: Image classification is an
important step in CAD. In classification of endoscopic
images a hybrid implementation by advanced fuzzy
inference neural network which combines fuzzy systems
and Radial Basis Function (RBF) was proposed. The
concept of fusion of multiple classifiers dedicated to
specific feature parameters with an accuracy of 94.28%
but RBF was characterized by a very fast training rate
than fuzzy. It extracted both texture and statistical
features [13].

E) Application of Artificial Intelligence Techniques
in the Computer Games
Playing games is one of the most popular uses for
computer technology. In the evolution of computer
games, they have grown from modest text based to the
three dimensional graphical games with complex and
large worlds. The systems as graphics rendering, playing
audio, user input and game artificial intelligence (AI)
when put together provide the expected entertainment and
make a worthwhile computer game. Artificial intelligence
is the most important part of every computer game and
playing the game without artificial intelligence would not
be any fun!. If we remove artificial intelligence from
computer games, the games will be so simple that nobody

3.3.1.2) MRI Brain Tumour Analysis
For the MRI brain tumour images a general regression
neural network (GRNN) based automatic three-

82

ISSN: 2277-3754
ISO 9001:2008 Certified
International Journal of Engineering and Innovative Technology (IJEIT)
Volume 4, Issue 10, April 2015
will be interested in playing the computer games
i. If so, check whether the new path is more
anymore!. Without the game AI, the winning would not
efficient (lower f-value).
be difficult at all. Artificial intelligence is used to solve
1. If so, update path.
common problems in the computer games and provide the
ii. Else, add C to open list.
features to the games. Specifically, non-playing character
c. Repeat step 5 for all valid children of B.
(NPC) path finding, decision making and learning are
6. Move B from the Open list to the closed list and
examined. There are several ways that AI contributes to
repeat
modern computer games. Most notably are unit
From step 4.[9]
movement, simulated perception, situation analysis,
spatial reasoning, learning, group coordination, resource
5.2) NPC Decision Making Using Bayesian Networks
allocation, steering, flocking, target selection, and so
In the previous example of the monster negotiating a
many more. Even context dependent animation and audio
path to the player, a different problem must be solved
use AI [2].
first before negotiating the path. The problem is does the
Computer Game Problems Solved with AI: Artificial
monster even know the player is present in the building?
intelligence solves the three common problems: nonIf the game designers give the full information of the
playing character (NPC) movement, NPC decision
game world to the non-playing character then there would
making, and NPC learning. The four artificial intelligence
be no fun in playing the game. This is an example of NPC
techniques used are Path Finding, Bayesian Networks,
Decision making. In this AI is needed to make the nonFuzzy Logic, and Genetic Algorithms which help a
playing character to act in a human like way. When the
computer game provide non-playing character path
player enters the building from the other side, the monster
finding and decision making as well as learning.
will be unaware of the presence of the player because of
the wall between them. If the player enters causing a
noise disturbance, then the monster will sense the player
5.1) NPC Movement Using Path-Finding
Artificial intelligence computer game must provide a
and will start negotiating the shortest path as discussed in
way for a non-playing character to move throughout the
the NPC movement using path finding. One AI technique
game world. For example, When then player is on one
that is used to implement this is a Bayesian Network. It
side of the building and the monster is on the other,
helps NPC to perform complex reasoning in a human like
through which path through the building the monster will
fashion. In this the computer calculates the probability of
reach the player? This is the NPC movement problem.AI
the monster sensing the player if the player has entered
Search Methods are used to find the path in computer
the building. This expression can be written as;
games. A* algorithm is the most widely used for path
P (B|A) = P (B|A) P (A) / P (B) [2]
negotiation because of its flexibility and also because it
determine the shortest path between two points. Typical
Where P (B|A) is the probability that the monster
A* algorithms have three main attributes, fitness, goal,
would sense the player if the player had actually tripped.
and heuristic or f, g, and h respectively. g is the cost to
and P (A) is the probability of the monster sensing the
travel from the start node to some node between the goal.
player. and P (B) is the probability of the player tripping
h is the heuristic or estimated cost to get from this node to
[2].
the goal. f is the sum of g and h, or the total estimated
cost of a path going through this node. The A* algorithm
5.3) NPC Learning
also maintains an Open list of the nodes that have not
Computer games use the Artificial Intelligence Genetic
been explored yet and a Closed list of nodes that have
Algorithms to try and implement learning in NPC‟s. A
been explored. The following is pseudo code for the A*
genetic algorithm works in the following way [7].
algorithm [9].
1. Create a first generation population of random
1. Let P = the starting point.
organisms.
2. Assign f, g, and h values to P.
2. Test them on the problem that is being solved and
3. Add P to the Open list. At this point P is the only
rank them according to fitness. If the best organisms have
node on the Open list.
reached our performance goals then stop.
4. Let B = the best node from the Open list (best node
3. Take the best performers and mate them by applying
has the lowest f-value).
genetic operators such as crossover and mutation. Add a
a. If B is the goal node, then quit. A path has been
few brand-new random organisms to the population to
found.
introduce new variety and help ensure against
b. If the Open list is empty, then quit. A path has
convergence on a local maximum.
been found.
4. Loop to step 2.
5. Let C = a valid node connected to B.
Genetic Algorithms try and build the perfect specimen
a. Assign f, g, and h values to C.
and are very complex. This AI technique has not found
b. Check whether C is on the Open and Closed list.
itself into many modern computer games because it takes

83

ISSN: 2277-3754
ISO 9001:2008 Certified
International Journal of Engineering and Innovative Technology (IJEIT)
Volume 4, Issue 10, April 2015
[9] J. Matthews, Basic A* Path finding Made Simple, AI
a lot of computer resources and time to evolve a specimen
Game Programming Wisdom, Charles River Media, Inc.,
or NPC into something worthwhile.
Hingham, MA, 2002.

IV. CONCLUSION
The field of artificial intelligence gives the ability to
the
machines
to
think
analytically,
using
concepts. Tremendous contribution to the various areas
has been made by the Artificial Intelligence techniques
from the last 2 decades. Artificial Intelligence will
continue to play an increasingly important role in the
various fields. This paper is based on the concept of
artificial intelligence, areas of artificial intelligence and
the artificial intelligence techniques used in the field of
Power System Stabilizers (PSS) to maintain system
stability and damping of oscillation and provide highquality performance, in the Network Intrusion Detection
to protect the network from intruders, in the medical area
in the field of medicine, for medical image classification,
in the accounting databases, and described how these AI
techniques are used in computer games to solve the
common problems and to provide features to the games
so as to have fun. There is bright future in the analysis of
Network Intrusion Detection and there is also definite
future in the area of Power System Stabilizers. We
conclude that further research in this area can be done as
there are very promising and profitable results that are
obtainable from such techniques. While scientists have
not yet realized the full potential and ability of artificial
intelligence. This technology and its applications will
likely have far-reaching effects on human life in the years
to come.

[10] Mahdiyeh EslamiI, Hussain Shaareef, Azah Mohamed,
“Application of artificial intelligent techniques in PSS
design: a survey of the state-of-the-art methods”.
[11] Oscar Firschein, Martin A. Fischler, L.Stephen Coles, Jay
M. Tenenbaum, “FORECASTING AND ASSESSING
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON
SOCIETY”, unpublished.
[12] S.N. Deepa, B. Aruna Devi, “A survey on artificial
intelligence approaches for medical image classification”,
Indian Journal of Science and Technology, Vol. 4 No. 11
(Nov 2011).
[13] Vassilis S Kodogiannis and John N Lygouras (2008)
Neuro-fuzzy classification system for wireless capsule
endoscopic images. J. World Acad. Sci.Engg. & Technol.,
45, 620-628.
[14] Zadeh L, “Fuzzy sets Inf Control”, 1965.

Expert Systems in Accounting
AUTHOR BIOGRAPHY
Avneet Pannu received the B.Tech degree in Computer Science and
Engineering from the Punjab Technical University, Jalandhar in 2013.
She is doing M.Tech degree in Department of Computer Science and
Engineering at DAV Institute of Engineering & Technology, Jalandhar
under Punjab Technical University. Her research interests include
Wireless Sensor Networks.L E. O'LEARY
DANIEL E. O'LEARY DANIEL E. O'LEARY

REFERENCES
[1] N Ramesh, C Kambhampati, JRT Monson, PJ Drew,
“Artificial intelligence in medicine”, 2004.
[2] Charles Weddle, Graduate Student, Florida State
University “Artificial Intelligence and Computer Games”,
unpublished.
[3] C. Sampada,, et al, "Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Intrusion
Detection Systems", Proceedings: International Conference
on Information Technology: Coding and Computing
(ITCC‟04),2004.
[4] Daniel B. Neill, “Using Artificial Intelligence to Improve
Hospital Inpatient Care”.
[5] Daniel E.O.‟Leary Artificial Intelligence and Expert
System in Accounting Databases: Survey and Extensions”,
Expert Systems with Applications, vol-3, 1991.
[6] Fatai Adesina Anifowose, Safiriyu Ibiyemi Eludiora,
“Application of Artificial Intelligence in Network Intrusion
Detection”, World Applied Programming, Vol (2), No (3),
March 2012.
[7] F. D. Laramee, Genetic Algorithms: Evolving the Perfect
Troll, AI Game Programming Wisdom, Charles River
Media, Inc., Hingham, MA, 2002
[8] Holland JH, “Adaptation in Natural and Artificial
Systems”, 1975.

84

