International Journal of Emerging Trends & Technology in Computer Science (IJETTCS)
Web Site: www.ijettcs.org Email: editor@ijettcs.org
Volume 4, Issue 2, March-April 2015

ISSN 2278-6856

NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING
USING ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Unnati Dhavare 1, Prof. Umesh Kulkarni 2
1

A.R.M.I.E.T A.S.Rao Nagar, Sapgaon, Shahapur, Thane, Maharashtra 400708

2

V.I.T. Vidyalankar campus, Vidyalankar College Marg, Wadala (East), Mumbai, Maharashtra 400037

Abstract
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is the study of how to make
computers (machines) do things which, at the moment, people
do better. There are many applications of the artificial
intelligence. NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING (NLP) is
one of the upcoming applications of AI.The goal of the
Natural Language Processing is to design and build software
that will analyze, understand, and generate languages that
humans use naturally, so that eventually you will be able to
address your computer as though you were addressing another
person. Natural Language Processing is the use of computers
to process written and spoken language for some practical,
useful, purpose: to translate languages, to get information
from the web on text data banks so as to answer questions, to
carry on conversations with machines, and to get advice
about, say, pensions and so on. Practical applications of
natural language processing are machine translation,
database access, information retrieval, text categorization,
extracting data from text etc.Still no such completely working
system has developed yet but research is going on. And it may
be done soon. Some basic systems are already developed like
ELIZA, INTELLISHRINK, and AMALGAM etc.

is hardest for a computer to master. Long after machines
have proven capable of inverting large matrices with
speed and grace, they still fail to master the basics of our
spoken and written languages.

2. LITERATURE SURVEY
A linguistic ontology of space for natural language
processing John A. Bateman, , Joana Hois, Robert Ross,
Thora Tenbrink 2010[1]. Natural Language Processing
(Almost) from Scratch published in the journal of
machine learning research in 2011 Ronan Collobert, Jason
Weston [2]. Natural Language Processing For Indian
Languages: A Literature Survey Paperback – August 23,
2012 by P. J. Antony (Author), K. P. Soman [3]. Seth
Grimes on BI, text/content analytics, sentiment analysis,
and more March 4, 2013.

3. COMPONENTS OF NLP SYSTEM

KEYWORDS: Artificial Intelligence, Natural Language
Processing.

1. INTRODUCTION
Artificial Intelligence is the science and engineering of
making intelligent machines, especially intelligent
computer programs. It is related to the similar task of
using computers to understand human intelligence, but AI
does not have to confine itself to methods that are
biologically observable. As a theory in the philosophy of
mind, artificial intelligence (or AI) is the view that human
cognitive mental states can be duplicated in computing
machinery. Accordingly, an intelligent system is nothing
but an information processing system.
NATURAL
LANGUAGE PROCESSING (NLP) is one of the
upcoming applications of AI. The goal of the Natural
Language Processing (NLP) is to design and build
software that will analyze, understand, and generate
languages that humans use naturally, so that eventually
you. will be able to address your computer as though you
were addressing another person. This goal is not easy to
reach. "Understanding" language means, among other
things, knowing what concepts a word or phrase stands
for and knowing how to link those concepts together in a
meaningful way. It's ironic that natural language, the
symbol system that is easiest for humans to learn and use,

Volume 4, Issue 2, March – April 2015

Figure 1: Model of a Language Enabled System
Fig.1 shows a model of a Language Enabled System.
Within this general model there are, of course, many
different configurations. Depending on the application of
the technology, not all these components are needed. The
basic processes of Natural Language Processing are shown
in the diagram above. These are broadly concerned with:
 Entering material into the computer, using speech,
printed text or handwriting, or text either keyed in or
introduced electronically.
 Recognizing the language of the material,
distinguishing separate words, for example, recording
it in symbolic form and validating it.
 Building an understanding of the meaning of the
material, to the appropriate level for the particular
application.
Page 203

International Journal of Emerging Trends & Technology in Computer Science (IJETTCS)
Web Site: www.ijettcs.org Email: editor@ijettcs.org
Volume 4, Issue 2, March-April 2015
 Using this understanding in an application such as
transformation (e.g. speech to text), information
retrieval, or human language translation.
 Generating the medium for presenting the results of
the application finally, presenting the results to
human users via a display of some kind: a printer or
a plotter; a loud speaker or the telephone.

4. ARCHITECTURE OF NLP SYSTEM
By far the largest part of human linguistic communication
occurs as speech. Written language is a fairly recent
invention and still plays a less central role than speech in
most activities. But processing written language is easier,
in some ways, than processing speech. For example to
build a program that understands spoken language, we
need all the facilities of a written language understand as
well as enough additional knowledge to handle all noise
and ambiguities of the audio signal. Thus it is useful to
divide the entire language processing problem into two
tasks:
1) Processing written text, using lexical, syntactic, and
semantic knowledge of the language as well as the
required real world information.
2) Processing spoken language, using all the information
needed above plus additional knowledge about phonology
as well as enough added information to handle the further
ambiguities that arise in speech

Figure 2: Architecture of NLP System
The diagram above depicts the chain of activities which
are involved in Language Engineering, from research to
the delivery of language-enabled and language enhanced
products and services to end-users. The process of
research and development leads to the development of
techniques, the production of resources, and the
development of standards. These are the basic building
blocks. Language Engineering is applied at two levels. At

Volume 4, Issue 2, March – April 2015

ISSN 2278-6856

the first level there are a number of generic classes of
application, such as:
 language translation
 information management (multi-lingual)
 authoring (multi-lingual)
 human/machine interface (multi-lingual voice and
text)
At the second level, these enabling applications are
applied to real world problems across the social and
economic spectrum. So, for example:
 Information management can be used in an
information service, as the basis for analyzing
requests for information and matching the request
against a database of text or images, to select the
information accurately.
 Authoring tools are typically used in word processing
systems but can also be used to generate text, such as
business letters in foreign languages, as well as in
conjunction with information management, to provide
document management facilities
 Human language translation is currently used to
provide translator workbenches and automatic
translation in limited domains
 Most applications can usefully be provided with
natural language user interfaces, including speech, to
improve their usability
4.1 MAIN STEPS IN THE PROCESS
1. Morphological Analysis: Individual words are
analysed into their components, and non word tokens,
such as punctuation, are separated from the words.
2. Syntactic analysis: Linear sequences of words are
transformed into structures that show how the words
relate to each other. Some word sequences may be
rejected if they violate the language's rules for how
words may be combined. For example, an English
syntactic analyzer would reject the sentence "Boy the
go the store."
3. Semantic Analysis: The structures created by the
syntactic analyzer are assigned meaning. In other
words, a mapping is made between the syntactic
structures and the objects in the task domain.
Structures for which no such mapping is possible may
be rejected. For example, in most universes, the
sentence "Colorless green ideas sleep furiously"
would be rejected as semantically anomalous.
4. Discourse Integration: The meaning of an individual
sentence may depend on the sentences that precede it
and may influence the meaning of the sentences that
follow it. For example, the word "it" in the sentence,
“John wanted it”, depends on the prior discourse
context, while the word "John" may influence the
meaning of later sentences.
5. Pragmatics Analysis: The structure representing what
was said is reinterpreted to determine what was
actually meant. For example, the sentence "Do you
know what time it is?" should be interpreted as a
request to be told the time
Page 204

International Journal of Emerging Trends & Technology in Computer Science (IJETTCS)
Web Site: www.ijettcs.org Email: editor@ijettcs.org
Volume 4, Issue 2, March-April 2015
5. COMPARISION OF NLP SYSTEM
Table 1: Comparison among already developed NLIDB
System

ISSN 2278-6856

encouragement in the development of this methodology.
They supported me with scientific guidance, advice and
encouragement, and were always helpful and enthusiastic
and this inspired me in my work. I have benefitted from
numerous discussions with guide and other colleagues.

REFERENCES
[1]. Natural Language Processing (Special Issues of
Artificial Intelligence) Paperback – Import, 11 May
1994 by Fernando C N Pereira (Author).
[2]. Eugene Charniak and Drew McDermott, Introduction
to Artificial Intelligence, Pearson, 1998, Chapter4.
[3]. Enhanced Text Retrieval Using Natural Language
Processing Elizabeth D. Liddy President1, 2 Article
first
published
online:
31
JAN
2005
DOI: 10.1002/bult.91

6. ADVANTAGES OF NLP SYSTEM
The benefits to be gained from successful Natural
Language Processing are immense. They include:
1. Improved service from our public administration and
public service agencies.
2. Wide accessibility of information through easier use
of computer systems and Information Services.
3. Enhanced ability to compete in global markets.
4. Saving time by using intelligent computer systems as
our agents.
5. Improvements in the quality of information recorded
in information systems.
6. Better filtering of information when we need it.
7. More effective international co-operation.
8. Improved safety through 'hands-free' operation of
equipment.
9. Greater security through voice verification
techniques.

7. CONCLUSION
The complete process of the natural language processing
system, at many places had made the work easier. Just by
our natural language (any language) we can direct the
robot, which can do conversation with computer and there
is no need of a person to work as a translator for the
conversation between two persons who don’t know any
common language. Still current program have not reached
this level but they may do so very soon. Language
technologies can be applied to a wide range of problems in
business and administration to produce better, more
effective solutions. They can also be used in education, to
help the disabled, and to bring new services both to
organizations and to consumers. There are a number of
areas where the impact is significant such as competing in
a global market, offering services directly through telebusiness, supporting electronic commerce, enhancing
entertainment, leisure and creativity.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
I would like to express my sincere gratitude towards my
guide Prof.Umesh Kulkarni for the help, guidance and

Volume 4, Issue 2, March – April 2015

[4]. Ambient intelligence—the next step for artificial
intelligence C Ramos, JC Augusto, D Shapiro Intelligent Systems, IEEE, 2008ieeexplore.ieee.org
References 1. IST Advisory Group, Scenarios for
Ambient Intelligence in 2010.
[5]. Natural language processing: an introduction
PrakashMNadkarni,
1. LucilaOhnoMachado,2 and Wendy W Chapman2
in volume 18 on page 540.J Am Med Inform Assoc.
2011 Sep-Oct; 18(5): 544–551.
[6]. K.R. Chowdhary Professor & Head CSE Dept.
M.B.M. Engineering College, Jodhpur, India.April29,
2012.NaturalLanguageProcessing.
[7]. Rada Mihalce, Hugo Liu, and Henry Lieberman
Computer Science Department, University of North
Texas rada@cs.unt.edu Media Arts and Sciences,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. NLP (Natural
Language Processing) for NLP (Natural Language
Programming).

Page 205

