ISSN (Online) 2321 – 2004
ISSN (Print) 2321 – 5526

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF INNOVATIVE RESEARCH IN ELECTRICAL, ELECTRONICS, INSTRUMENTATION AND CONTROL ENGINEERING
Vol. 3, Issue 7, July 2015

Artificial Intelligence in Power Station
Reshmi Banerjee
Assistant Professor, Department of Electrical Engineering, Guru Nanak Institute of Technology, Kolkata, India
Abstract: Artificial intelligence is the science of automating intelligent behaviours currently achievable by humans.
Power system has grown tremendously over a few decades. As the size and complexity of the power system consisting
of generators, transmission lines, power transformers, distribution transformers etc. increases the possibility of inviting
faults. The acquisition of data, the processing of those data for use by the operator, and control of remote devices are
the fundamental building blocks of all modern utility control systems. Manual calculations, technical analysis and
conclusions initially adopted the power system design, operation and control. As the power system grew it become
more complex due to the technical advancements, variety and dynamic requirements.
Keywords: Artificial intelligence, Expert system, Artificial neural network, Fuzzy logic, Power station.
I. INTRODUCTION
There are three types of major power plants known for the Advantages of artificial neural networks :
massive electricity generation :
 Speed of processing.
i) Thermal power plants, ii) Hydal power plants,  They do not need any appropriate knowledge of the
iii) Nuclear power plants.
system model.

They have the ability to handle situations of incomplete
One may expect that the mobile sensing will play an
data and information, corrupt data.
increasingly important role in the monitoring of power
system. Artificial intelligence is known to be the  They are fault tolerant.
intelligence exhibited by machines and software, for  Artificial neural networks are fast and robust.
example, robots and computer programs.
Disadvantages of artificial neural networks :
An expert system obtains the knowledge of a human  Large dimensionality.
expert in a narrow specified domain into a machine  Results are always generated even if the input data are
implementable form. Expert systems are unable to learn or
unreasonable.
adopt to new problems or situations. Expert systems are  They are not scalable i.e. once an artificial neural
also called as knowledge based systems or rule based
network is trained to do certain task, it is difficult to
systems. Expert systems are computer programs which
extend for other tasks without retraining the neural
have proficiency and competence in a particular field.
network.
Artificial neural networks are biologically inspired Fuzzy logic or fuzzy systems are logical systems for
systems which convert a set of inputs into a set of outputs
standardisation and formalisation of approximate
by a network of neurons, where each neuron produces one
reasoning. It is similar to human decision making with an
output as a function of inputs. A fundamental neuron can
be considered as a processor which makes a simple non ability to produce exact and accurate solutions from
linear operation of it’s inputs producing a single output. certain or even approximate information and data. Fuzzy
They are classified by their architecture : number of layers logic is the way like which human brain works, and we
and topology : connectivity pattern, feed forward or can use this technology in machines so that they can
perform somewhat like humans.
recurrent.
II. METHODOLOGY
There are mainly three techniques : i)Expert system
techniques, ii)Artificial neural networks, iii)Fuzzy logic
systems.






Fig. 1 : Artificial neural system
Copyright to IJIREEICE

Since expert systems are basically computer programs, the
process of writing codes for these programs is simpler than
actually calculating and estimating the value of parameters
used in generation, transmission and distribution.
Any modifications even after design can be easily done
because they are computer programs.
As artificial neural networks operate on biological
institutes and perform biological evaluation of real world
problems, the problems in generation, transmission and
distribution of electricity can be fed to the artificial neural
networks so that a suitable solution can be obtained.

DOI 10.17148/IJIREEICE.2015.3717

86

ISSN (Online) 2321 – 2004
ISSN (Print) 2321 – 5526

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF INNOVATIVE RESEARCH IN ELECTRICAL, ELECTRONICS, INSTRUMENTATION AND CONTROL ENGINEERING
Vol. 3, Issue 7, July 2015

 Given the constraints of a practical transmission and
distribution system, the exact values of parameters can
be determined.
 For example, the value of inductance, capacitance and
resistance in a transmission line can be numerically
calculated by artificial neural networks taking in various
factors like environmental factors, unbalancing
conditions, and other possible problems.
 Fuzzy logic can be used for designing the physical
components of power systems.

 Control of power system like voltage control, stability
control, power flow control, load frequency control.
 Control of power plants like fuel cells power plant
control, thermal power plant control.
 Automation of power system like restoration,
management, fault diagnosis, network security.
 Can be used in anything from small circuits to large
mainframes.
 Can be used to increase the efficiency of the
components used in power systems.
 As most of the data used in power system analysis are
approximate values and assumptions, fuzzy logic can be
of great use to derive a stable, exact and ambiguity free
output.
IV. CONCLUSION
A reliable, continuous supply of electrical energy is
essential for the functioning of today’s modern complex
and advanced society. Electricity is one of the prime
factors for the growth and determines the value of the
society. So, implementation of artificial intelligence is
very important in power system.
REFERENCES

Fig. 2 : Fuzzification
III. RESULT
 Replacing human workers for dangerous and highly
specialized operations, such as live maintenance of high
voltage transmission lines, has been a long standing
effect in the power community.
 Operation in hazardous environments, such as
radioactive locations in nuclear plants, access to tight
spaces, such as cable viaducts and cooling pipes, and
precise positioning of measurement equipment.
 Expert systems use the interface mechanism and
knowledge to solve problems which cannot be or
difficult to be solved by human skill and intellect.
 Results are permanent and consistent.
 Can be easily documented.
 Results can be easily transferred and reproduced.
 The understanding of the working of neurons and the
pattern of their interconnection can be used to construct
computers for solving real world problems of
classification of patterns and pattern recognition.
 Fuzzification provides superior expressive power,
higher generality and an improved capability to model
complex problems at low or moderate solution cost.
 Stability analysis and enhancement.
 Power system control.
 Fault diagnosis.
 Load forecasting.
 Reactive power planning and its control.
 Operation of power system like unit commitment,
hydro-thermal coordination, economic dispatch,
congestion management, maintenance scheduling, state
estimation, load and power flow.
 Planning of power system like generation expansion
planning, power system reliability, transmission
expansion planning, reactive power planning.
Copyright to IJIREEICE

[1] Stuart Russell, Peter Norvig, Artificial Intelligence : A Modern
Approach, Pearson.
[2] Jeff Heaton, Artificial Intelligence for Humans, Volume 1 :
Fundamental Algorithms, Create Space Independent Publishing
Platform.
[3] Philip C. Jackson Jr., Introduction to Artificial Intelligence, Dover
Publications.
[4] Keith Frankish, William M. Ramsey, The Cambridge Handbook of
Artificial Intelligence, Cambridge University Press.
[5] Kevin Warwick, Artificial Intelligence : The Basics, Routledge.
[6] Patrick Henry Winston, Artificial Intelligence, Pearson.
[7] George F. Luger, Artificial Intelligence : Structures and Strategies for
Complex Problem Solving, Pearson.
[8] Stephen Lucci, Danny Kopec, Artificial Intelligence in the 21st
Century, Mercury Learning & Information.
[9] David L. Poole, Alan K. Mackworth, Artificial Intelligence :
Foundations of Computational Agents, Cambridge University
Press.
[10] Mohamad Hassoun, Fundamentals of Artificial Neural Networks, A
Bradford Book.
[11] Sandhya Samarasinghe, Neural Networks for Applied Sciences and
Engineering, Auerbach Publications.
[12] Martin T Hagan, Howard B Demuth, Mark H Beale, Neural Network
Design, Martin Hagan.
[13] Laurene V. Fausett, Fundamentals of Neural Networks :
Architectures, Algorithms and Applications, Pearson.
[14] Simon Haykin, Neural Networks : A Comprehensive Foundation,
Prentice Hall.
[15] James A. Anderson, An Introduction to Neural Networks, A
Bradford Book.
[16] Timothy J. Ross, Fuzzy Logic with Engineering Applications, Wiley.
[17] Hung T. Nguyen, Elbert A. Walker, A First Course in Fuzzy Logic,
Chapman and Hall/CRC.
[18] Masao Mukaidono, Fuzzy Logic for Beginners, Wspc.
[19] P.K.Nag, Power Plant Engineering, Tata Mc Graw Hill Education.
[20] Prabha Kundur, Power System Stability and Control, Mc Graw Hill
Education.
[21] Allen J. Wood, Bruce F. Wollenberg, Gerald B. Sheble, Power
Generation, Operation and Control, Wiley-Interscience.
[22] Robert Miller, James Malinowski, Power System Operation, Mc
Graw Hill Education.
[23] Mark Fennell, Transmission of Electrical Power Explained Simply,
Create Space Independent Publishing Platform.
[24] B.M.Weedy, B.J.Cory, N.Jenkins, Electric Power Systems, Wiley.

DOI 10.17148/IJIREEICE.2015.3717

87

