AIBIRDS: The Angry Birds Artificial Intelligence Competition
Jochen Renz
Research School of Computer Science
The Australian National University
jochen.renz@anu.edu.au

Abstract
The Angry Birds AI Competition (aibirds.org) has been held
in conjunction with the AI 2012, IJCAI 2013 and ECAI 2014
conferences and will be held again at the IJCAI 2015 conference. The declared goal of the competition is to build an AI
agent that can play Angry Birds as good or better than the
best human players. In this paper we describe why this is a
very difficult problem, why it is a challenge for AI, and why
it is an important step towards building AI that can successfully interact with the real world. We also summarise some
highlights of past competitions, describe which methods were
successful, and give an outlook to proposed variants of the
competition.

Angry Birds as a Challenge for AI
Angry Birds is a very popular example of the physics-based
simulation game (PBSG) category. The game world in these
games is typically completely parameterized, i.e., all physics
parameters such as mass, friction, density of objects, gravity, as well as all object types and their properties and location are known internally. Any chosen action can be perfectly simulated using an underlying physics simulator such
as Box2D (box2d.org) which makes the execution and the
consequences of actions look very real. In Angry Birds, the
actions a player can perform are very simple: the player can
decide (1) on the release point x, y where a bird is released
from the slingshot and (2) on a time point t during flight
of the bird when its optional special power is activated. Both
the release point and the time point are in theory continuous, in practice very large, so that the resulting number of
different actions is huge. A game level is solved if executing a selected sequence of actions x, y, t leads to a game
state that satisfies certain victory conditions. In Angry Birds
all green pigs need to be destroyed in order to solve a given
game level (see Figure 1).
This simple game play and the simple actions mean that
even very young children are able to play the game successfully. The challenge of the AIBIRDS competition is to
build an AI player that can play new game levels as good
or better than the best human players. While this may sound
simple, particularly in comparison to seemingly hard games
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Figure 1: Angry Birds, Easter Eggs level 8 ( c Rovio Entertainment). A good shot would hit the three round rocks on the top right
which will trigger the destruction of the left half of the structure.

such as Chess, it is surprisingly difficult for a number of reasons. Assuming all parameters of the game world are known,
we could simulate a number of actions and based on the
outcome of the simulation, we could simulate a number of
follow-up actions and so on until the victory condition is
reached. If we select the actions we simulate in an intelligent way, this could lead to a successful solution strategy.
However, the main issue in physics-based simulation games
is that the outcome of an action is only known once we simulate it, which in turn requires us to know all parameters necessary for the simulation. This is very different from games
such as Chess where the outcome of each action is known
in advance. Accurately predicting or approximating the outcome of actions is one of the main challenge in this type of
games, which is required before we can even look into determining good action sequences. Combining this with the potentially infinite action space and the possible lack of complete information about all required parameters means that
we are in for a big challenge. Humans are very good at predicting consequences of physical actions (if I do this then
this will happen, which in turn will trigger that, etc.), while
this form of reasoning in unknown environments is still unsolved in its generality.
In the AIBIRDS competition, we play Angry
Birds using the web version, publically available at
chrome.angrybirds.com. The competition server interfaces

with the website using a Chrome browser extension which
allows us to take screenshots of the live game and to
execute different actions using simulated mouse operations.
Participating agents run on a client computer and can
only interact with the server via a fixed communication
protocol. This allows agents to request screenshots and to
submit actions and other commands which the server then
executes on the live game. Therefore, the only information
participants obtain are sequences of screenshots of the live
game. Hence, AI agents have exactly the same information
available as human players. In particular, they don’t know
the exact location and other parameters of objects or the
game world.
What is provided to participants is a computer vision
module that detects known (=hard-coded) objects and gives
an approximation of the objects boundary, their location and
type. In addition, a trajectory planning module is provided
which allows agents to specifiy which point they want to hit
with a bird and if they want to shoot with a high or a low
trajectory. This module then returns the approximate release
point that hits the given target point. Since this depends on
the scale of the game world, which can be different for every
level, the trajectory planning module automatically adjusts
trajectories in subsequent shots. In order to demonstrate the
use of these modules, a sample agent called the Naive Agent
is provided, which selects a random pig as the next target,
and selects a random trajectory and tap point depending on
the bird type.
During the competition, participants receive a number of
unknown game levels they have to solve within a given time
limit. Game levels can be played and re-played in any order.
Agents are ranked according to the overall points they obtain in the given time (=sum of maximum points scored per
solved game level) and after several rounds of elimination a
winner is determined. During the Human vs Machine Challenge, we then test whether the best AI agents are already
better than humans (=typically conference participants).
In order to achieve the goal of the competition, i.e., to develop an AI agent as good as or better than human players,
we need to efficiently solve a number of problems in an environment that behaves according to the laws of physics:
1. detect and classify known and unknown objects
2. learn properties of (unknown) objects and the game world
3. predict the outcome of actions
4. select good actions in a given situation
5. plan a successful action sequence
6. plan the order in which game levels are played
These problems can be covered by different areas of AI such
as Computer Vision, Machine Learning, Knowledge Representation and Reasoning, Planning, Heuristic Search, and
Reasoning under Uncertainty, but due to the physical nature of the game world and the unknown outcome of actions, these are largely open problems. Progress and contributions in each of these areas will improve the performance
of an agent, but in order to reach the goal, we need to jointly
develop solutions to these problems across different AI areas. What makes research on PBSG such as Angry Birds so

important, is that the same problems need to be solved by
AI systems that can successfully interact with the physical
world. Humans have these capabilities and are using them
constantly, AI is a long way away in this respect. This competition and other PBSG games offer a platform to develop
these capabilities in a simplified and controlled environment.

An overview of past competitions
So far 36 teams from 16 countries have participated in the
competition and we have seen a multitude of different techniques. The best approaches so far used logic programming,
qualitative reasoning, advanced simulation, structural analysis, analysis of predicted damage, and different machine
learning techniques such as Bayesian ensemble learning. Interestingly, the winning agents in 2013 and in 2014 both
used a number of different strategies, some of them very
simple, and selected one of them depending on the game
level and the current situation.
The preformance of agants is improving significantly, as
measured in the Human vs Machine challenge. In 2013,
agents were clearly better than beginners, while in 2014 the
best agents are already in the top third of human players. Interestingly, the two best teams in 2014 were both new teams,
so newcomers have a good chance of doing well and are encouraged to participate. We also benchmarked all teams using the standard game levels. Team descriptions and other
information are available at the aibirds.org website.

New variants of the competition
We have developed a version of the basic Angry Birds
AI game playing software using Snap! (snap.berkeley.edu),
a simple visiual programming language also used by
code.org. The goal of the AIBIRDS Snap! implementation
(aibirds.org/snap) is to teach kids about AI and programming in a playful way. It allows kids to implement and test
their own Angry Birds strategies while acquiring basic programming skills. We envisage a separate competition for
school children based on the AIBIRDS Snap! implementation.
At the upcoming competition at IJCAI 2015, we plan to
have a new competititve track where two agents try to solve
game levels with alternating shots. At the beginning the two
agents each submit a concealed offer as to how many points
they are willing to pay for the right of the first shot. The
agent with the higher offer starts and the agent with the winning shot gets all the points of the level. If the agent with the
higher offer wins the level, the offered points are paid to the
other agent. This competitive variant is easily possible with
a small modification to the client/server communication protocol. The aim is to encourage agents to analyze game levels
and to evaluate actions in advance rather than winning by a
lucky shot. In addition it could make the competition interesting for game theory researchers.

Acknowledgements
Thanks to my co-organizers XiaoYu (Gary) Ge, Peng Zhang,
Stephen Gould, and the many students, supporters and participants who contributed to this competition.

