150

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 60, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013

Kron Reduction of Graphs With Applications to
Electrical Networks
Florian Dörfler and Francesco Bullo

Abstract—Consider a weighted undirected graph and its corresponding Laplacian matrix, possibly augmented with additional
diagonal elements corresponding to self-loops. The Kron reduction
of this graph is again a graph whose Laplacian matrix is obtained
by the Schur complement of the original Laplacian matrix with respect to a specified subset of nodes. The Kron reduction process is
ubiquitous in classic circuit theory and in related disciplines such
as electrical impedance tomography, smart grid monitoring, transient stability assessment, and analysis of power electronics. Kron
reduction is also relevant in other physical domains, in computational applications, and in the reduction of Markov chains. Related
concepts have also been studied as purely theoretic problems in
the literature on linear algebra. In this paper we analyze the Kron
reduction process from the viewpoint of algebraic graph theory.
Specifically, we provide a comprehensive and detailed graph-theoretic analysis of Kron reduction encompassing topological, algebraic, spectral, resistive, and sensitivity analyses. Throughout our
theoretic elaborations we especially emphasize the practical applicability of our results to various problem setups arising in engineering, computation, and linear algebra. Our analysis of Kron reduction leads to novel insights both on the mathematical and the
physical side.
Index Terms—Algebraic graph theory, equivalent circuit, Kron
reduction, network-reduced model, Ward equivalent.

I. INTRODUCTION

C

ONSIDER an undirected, connected, and weighted graph
. The corwith nodes and adjacency matrix
responding loopy Laplacian matrix is the matrix
with off-diagonal elements
and diagonal elements
. Consider now a simple algebraic operation, namely the Schur complement of the loopy Laplacian
matrix with respect to a subset of nodes. As it turns out, the
is again a well-defined
resulting lower dimensional matrix
loopy Laplacian matrix, and a graph can be naturally associated
to it.
This paper investigates this Schur complementation from the
viewpoint of algebraic graph theory. In particular we seek answers to the following questions. How are the spectrum and the
related? How about the coralgebraic properties of and
responding graph topologies and the effective resistances? What
is the effect of a perturbation in the original graph on the reduced
Manuscript received November 23, 2011; revised March 09, 2012; accepted
May 06, 2012. Date of publication September 28, 2012; date of current version January 04, 2013. This work is based in part upon work supported by NSF
grants IIS-0904501 and CPS-1135819. This paper was recommended by Associate Editor Jinhu Lu.
The authors are with the Center for Control, Dynamical Systems and Computation, University of California at Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA 93106
USA (e-mail: dorfler@engineering.ucsb.edu; bullo@engineering.ucsb.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2012.2215780

graph, its loopy Laplacian
, its spectrum, and its effective
resistance? Finally, why is this graph reduction process of practical importance and in which application areas? These are some
of the questions that motivate this paper.
Electrical networks and the Kron reduction. To illustrate
the physical dimension of the problem setup introduced above,
we consider the associated linear circuit with nodes, current
injections
, nodal voltages
, branch conductances
, and shunt conductances
connecting
node to the ground. The resulting current-balance equations
are
, where the conductance matrix
is
the loopy Laplacian. In circuit theory and related disciplines it
is desirable to obtain a lower dimensional electrically-equivalent network from the viewpoint of certain boundary nodes
,
. If
denotes the set
of interior nodes, then, after appropriately labeling the nodes,
the current-balance equations can be partitioned as
(1)
Gaussian elimination of the interior voltages
in (1) gives
an electrically-equivalent reduced network with the nodes
obeying the reduced current-balance equations
(2)
where the reduced conductance matrix
is given
by the Schur complement of with respect to the interior nodes
, that is,
, and the accompanying
maps internal curmatrix
rents to boundary currents in the reduced network.
This reduction of an electrical network via a Schur complement of the associated conductance matrix is known as Kron reduction due to the seminal work of Gabriel Kron [1]. In case of
a star-like network without interior current injections and shunt
conductances, the Kron reduction of a network reduces to the
(generalized) star-triangle transformation [2], [3].
Literature review. The Kron reduction of networks is
ubiquitous in circuit theory and related applications in order
to obtain lower dimensional electrically-equivalent circuits.
It appears for instance in the behavior, synthesis, and analysis of resistive circuits [4]–[6], particularly in the context
of large-scale integration chips [7], [8]. When applied to the
impedance matrix of a circuit rather than the admittance matrix,
Kron reduction is also referred to as the “shortage operator”
[9], [10]. Kron reduction is a standard tool in the power systems community to obtain so-called “network-reduced” or
“Ward-equivalent” models for power flow studies [11], [12], to
reduce differential-algebraic power network models to purely
dynamic models [13]–[16], and it is crucial for reduced order

1549-8328/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE

DÖRFLER AND BULLO: KRON REDUCTION OF GRAPHS WITH APPLICATIONS TO ELECTRICAL NETWORKS

modeling, analysis, and efficient simulation of induction motors
[17] and power electronics [18], [19]. A recent application of
Kron reduction is monitoring in smart power grids [20] via
synchronized phasor measurement units. Kron reduction is also
known in the literature on electrical impedance tomography,
where
is referred to as the “Dirichlet-to-Neumann map”
[21]–[23]. More generally, the Schur complement of a matrix
and its associated graph is known in the context of Gaussian
elimination of sparse matrices [24]–[26] and its application
to Laplacian matrices can be found, for example, in sparse
multi-grid solvers [27] and in finite-element analysis [17].
It serves as popular application example in linear algebra
[28]–[31], a similar concept is employed in the cyclic reduction
[32] or the stochastic complement [33] of Markov chains, and
a related concept is the Perron complement [34], [35] of a
matrix and its associated graph with applications in data mining
[36]. Finally, Kron reduction also appears in the context of
the Yang-Baxter equation and its applications in knot theory,
high-energy physics, and statistical mechanics [37].
This brief literature review shows that Kron reduction is both
a practically important and theoretically fascinating problem occurring in numerous applications. Each of the aforementioned
communities has different insights into Kron reduction. Engineers understand the physical dimension, the computation community investigates the sparsity patterns of the associated matrices, and the linear algebra community is interested in eigenvalue problems. Surprisingly, across different scientific communities little is known about the graph-theoretic properties of
Kron reduction. Yet the graph-theoretic analysis of Kron reduction provides novel and deep insights both on the mathematical
and the physical side of the considered problem.
Contributions. In this paper we provide a detailed and
comprehensive graph-theoretic analysis of the Kron reduction
process. Our general graph-theoretic framework and analysis
of Kron reduction encompasses various theoretical problem
setups as well as practical applications in a unified language.
Essentially, Kron reduction of a connected graph, possibly
with self-loops, is a Schur complement of corresponding loopy
Laplacian matrix with respect to a subset of nodes. We relate
the topological, the algebraic, and the spectral properties of the
resulting Kron-reduced Laplacian matrix to those of the non-reduced Laplacian matrix. Furthermore, we relate the effective
resistances in the original graph to the elements and effective
resistances induced by the Kron-reduced Laplacian. Thereby,
we complement and extend various results in the literature on
the effective resistance of a graph [10], [38]–[41]. In our analysis, we carefully analyze the effects of self-loops, which typically model loads and dissipation. We also present a sensitivity
analysis of the algebraic, spectral, and resistive properties of the
Kron-reduced matrix with respect to perturbations in the non-reduced network topology. Finally, our analysis of Kron reduction complements the literature in linear algebra [28]–[31], and
we construct an explicit relationship to analogous results on the
Perron complement side [33]–[36] such that our results apply
also to Markov chain reductions.
In our analysis we do not aim at deriving only mathematical elegant results but also useful tools for practical applications. Our general graph-theoretic framework encompasses the
applications of Kron reduction in circuit theory [4]–[8], elec-

151

trical impedance tomography [21]–[23], sensitivity in power
flow studies [11], [12], monitoring in smart grids [20], transient
stability assessment in power grids [13]–[16], and the stochastic
reduction of Markov chains [29], [33]–[36]. Furthermore, we
demonstrate how each of these applications benefits from the
graph-theoretic viewpoint and analysis of the Kron reduction.
We believe that our general analysis is a first step towards more
detailed results in specific applications of Kron reduction.
Paper organization. The remainder of this section introduces some notation recalls some preliminaries in matrix
analysis and algebraic graph theory. Section II presents the
general framework of Kron reduction and reviews various application areas. Section III presents the graph-theoretic analysis
of the Kron reduction process. Finally, Section IV concludes
the paper and suggests some future research directions.
Preliminaries and Notation. Given a finite set , let
be
its cardinality, and define for
the set
.
and
be the
dimensional matrices of unit
Let
and zero entries, and let
be the -dimensional identity matrix. We adopt the shorthands
and
and
to be vector of zeros of appropriate dimension with
define
entry 1 at position . For a real-valued 1d-array
, let
be the associated diagonal matrix.
with ,
, let
Given a real-valued 2d-array
denote the associated matrix and
the transposed matrix. We use the following standard notation for submatrices
[42]: for two non-empty index sets ,
let
denote the submatrix of obtained by the rows indexed by and
the columns indexed by and define the shorthands
,
, and
. We adopt the shorthand
and
for ,
, and for
the notation
. For illustration, equation (1) can be written
unambiguously as

If
is nonsingular, then the Schur complement of with
respect to the block
(or equivalently the indices ) is
the
dimensional matrix
defined by

If is Hermitian, then we implicitly assume that its eigenvalues
.
are arranged in increasing order:
Consider the undirected, connected, and weighted graph
with node set
and edge set
induced
by a symmetric, nonnegative, and irreducible adjacency matrix
. A positive off-diagonal element
induces
a weighted edge
, and a positive diagonal element
induces a weighted self-loop
. We define the
corresponding degree matrix by
.
The Laplacian matrix is the symmetric matrix defined by
. Note that self-loops
do not appear in the Laplacian.
For these reasons and motivated by the conductance matrix in
circuit theory, we define the loopy Laplacian matrix
. Note that adjacency matrix can be recovered from the loopy Laplacian as
, and thus uniquely induces

152

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 60, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013

the graph . We refer to as strictly loopy (respectively loopless) Laplacian if the associated graph features at least one (respectively no) self-loop.
For a connected graph
, and all
remaining non-zero eigenvalues of are strictly positive. Specifis a spectral conically, the second-smallest eigenvalue
nectivity measure called the algebraic connectivity. Recall that
irreducibility of either , , or is equivalent to connectivity
.
of , which is again equivalent to
The effective resistance
between two nodes ,
of
an undirected connected graph with loopy Laplacian is
(3)
where
is the Moore-Penrose pseudo inverse of . Since
is symmetric (follows from the singular value decomposition),
the matrix of effective resistances is again a symmetric ma. The effective resistrix with zero diagonal elements
tance
can be thought of as a graph-theoretic metric, and it is
mostly analyzed for a loop-less and uniformly weighted graph
with
. We do not restrict ourselves to this case here. We
refer the reader to [10], [16], [38]–[41] for various applications
and properties of the effective resistance as well as interesting
results relating , , , , and
.
Remark I.1 (Physical Interpretation): If the graph is understood as a resistive circuit with conductance matrix , the efis defined as the potential difference befective resistance
tween the nodes and when a unit current is injected in and
extracted in . In this case, the current-balance equations are
. The potential difference
can
then be obtained as
.
II. PROBLEM SETUP, BASIC RESULTS, AND APPLICATIONS
A. The Kron Reduction Process
Consider an undirected, connected, and weighted graph
and its associated symmetric and irreducible
matrices: the adjacency matrix
, Laplacian matrix
, and loopy Laplacian matrix
. Furthermore, let
be a proper subset of nodes with
. We define
the
dimensional Kron-reduced matrix
by
(4)
as boundary
In the following, we refer to the nodes and
nodes and interior nodes, respectively. For notational simplicity
and without loss of generality, we will assume that the nodes
are labeled such that
. The following lemma establishes
as well as some
the existence of the Kron-reduced matrix
structural closure properties.
Lemma II.1 (Structural Properties of Kron Reduction): Let
be a symmetric irreducible loopy Laplacian and let
be a proper subset of
with
. The following statements
hold for the Kron-reduced matrix
:
is well defined.
1) Existence: The Kron-reduced matrix
2) Closure properties: If
is a symmetric loopy, strictly
loopy, or loop-less Laplacian matrix, respectively, then
is a symmetric loopy, strictly loopy, or loop-less
Laplacian matrix, respectively.
3) Accompanying matrix: The accompanying matrix
is nonnegative. If the

Fig. 1. Illustration of an electrical network with 4 boundary nodes , 8 interior
nodes , and unit-valued branch and shunt conductances. The associated loopy
Laplacian and the graph are equivalent representations. Kron reduction of
the interior nodes results in a reduced network among the boundary nodes
with the Kron-reduced matrix
and graph
.

subgraph among the interior nodes is connected and each
boundary node is adjacent to at least one interior node,
then
is positive. If additionally,
is a loopless Laplacian, then
is column stochastic.
An interesting consequence of Lemma II.1 is that
is a
loopy Laplacian matrix that induces again an undirected and
weighted graph, which we denote by
. Hence, Kron reduction, originally defined as an algebraic operation in (4), can be
equivalently interpreted as a graph-theoretic reduction process,
or as physical reduction of the associated circuit. This interplay
between linear algebra, graph theory, and physics is illustrated
in Fig. 1. Associated to
, define the reduced adjacency matrix
, the re, and
duced degree matrix
the reduced loop-less Laplacian
.
We remark that Lemma II.1 is partially also stated in [4], [5],
[13], [27], [28], [30] and present a self-contained proof here.
Proof of Lemma II.1: First, consider the case when the
graph among the interior nodes is connected, or equivalently
is irreducible. The matrix
is diagonally dominant
for all
. Due to irresince
ducibility of the strict inequality
holds at least for one
. Since
is irreducible, diagonally dominant, and has at least one row with
strictly positive row sum,
is invertible [43, Corollary
6.2.27]. If the graph among the interior nodes consists of multiple connected components, then, after appropriately labeling
the interior nodes, the matrix
is block-diagonal with irreducible diagonal blocks corresponding to the connected components. By the previous arguments, each diagonal block of
is nonsingular, and statement 1) follows.
Statement 2) is a consequence of the closure properties of the
Schur complement [42, Chapter 4], which includes the classes
of symmetric, positive definite, and -matrices. Since is a
symmetric -matrix, we conclude that
is
is a symmetric loopy
also a symmetric -matrix. Hence,

DÖRFLER AND BULLO: KRON REDUCTION OF GRAPHS WITH APPLICATIONS TO ELECTRICAL NETWORKS

153

Laplacian. This fact together with the closure of positive definite matrices reveals that the class of symmetric strictly loopy
Laplacians is closed under Kron reduction. To prove the closure
of symmetric loop-less Laplacians, notice that the row sums of
the loop-less Laplacian are given by

gree matrix , Laplacian
, and transition matrix
. Let be a proper subset of
with
, and consider the Kron-reduced Laplacian
, the reduced transition matrix
, and the pseudo-reduced adjacency matrix
. The following identities hold:

(5)

(6)

Elimination of the second block of equations in (5) results in
, which shows that
is a loop-less Laplacian
and concludes the proof of statement 2).
The second block of equations in (5) can be rewritten as
. Hence,
is a column stochastic matrix
is
in the loop-less case. In general,
nonnegative, since
and the inverse of the -matrix
are both nonnegative. If additionally each boundary
node is connected to at least one interior node and the graph
among the interior nodes is connected, then each row of
has at least one positive entry. Moreover, since
is an irreducible non-singular -matrix,
is positive [28, Theorem 5.12]. The latter two facts guarantee
positivity of
and complete the proof of statement 3).
As mentioned in Section I, the general purpose of Kron reduction is to construct low dimensional “equivalent” matrices,
graphs, or circuits. In the following, we describe different examples arising in Markov chains and circuit-theoretic applications
while emphasizing the graph-theoretic perspective.

(7)
Identity (6) gives an intuitive relation of the reduced transition matrix
, the boundary degree matrix
,
andthe pseudo-reduced adjacency matrix
. By identity
for distinct ,
(7),
, that is,
and
induce the same graph besides
self-loops. The diagonal elements satisfy
and
. As a consequence,
our results in Section III pertaining to Kron reduction can be
analogously stated for the stochastic complement. Also, if the
original graph features self-loops, the strictly loopy Laplacian
and identity (7) can be directly related via Theorem III.6.
Proof of Lemma II.2: To prove identity (6), recall that
, and consider the following set of equalities

B. Stochastic Complements and Markov Chain Reduction
A concept related to Kron reduction is the Perron complement
of row stochastic matrices [29], [34], [35]. This concept finds
application in Markov chain reduction [33] and data mining
[36], where it is termed stochastic complement. Here we relate
the Schur complement of a Laplacian to the stochastic complement of the associated Markov chain transition matrix.
Given a loop-less graph induced by a symmetric, nonnegative, and irreducible adjacency matrix
with corresponding degree matrix , we define the corresponding transi. The transition matrix induces
tion matrix by
the state transition map
of a finite-state Markov
chain, it is nonnegative, irreducible, and row stochastic, that
is,
. Generally,
is not symmetric. By the definitions of ,
, and
, we have that
. For
, recall the reduced loop-less
and define the reduced transiLaplacian
tion matrix
by the stochastic complement [33]

The reduced transition matrix
has various interesting
properties. For instance, analogously to Lemma II.1,
is again nonnegative, irreducible, and row-stochastic, see [29], [33]–[35] for further details. Finally,
we define the pseudo-reduced adjacency matrix
. Then we
obtain the following relations.
Lemma II.2 (Kron Reduction and Stochastic Complementation): Consider a loop-less graph induced by a symmetric, nonnegative, and irreducible adjacency matrix
with de-

where we used
(for a nonsingular
-matrix ); see [44, Equation (13)].
To prove identity (7) notice that
can be expanded as
By identity (6) the above expansion equals

.

C. Kron Reduction in Large-Scale Integration Chips
In integration chips, it is of interest to reduce the complexity
of large-scale circuits by replacing them with equivalent lower
dimensional circuits with the same terminals [7], [8]. The circuit
reduction problem also stimulated a matrix-theoretic and behavioral analysis from the viewpoint of boundary nodes [4]–[6],
[13]. For resistive networks, Kron reduction leads to such an
equivalent reduced circuit. A particular reduction goal in [7] is
to reduce the fill-in of the Kron-reduced matrix
for computation of the effective resistance. The proper choice of the
boundary nodes has a tremendous effect on the sparsity of the
Kron-reduced matrix and the subsequent computational effort;
see Fig. 2. Reduction of the fill-in is also a pervasive objective
in the computational applications [24]–[27].
Based on numerical observations and physical intuition, in
[7] it is argued that reduction of a connected component of
results in a dense component in
and the effective resistance
among boundary nodes is invariant under Kron reduction. This
paper puts the statements of [7] on solid mathematical ground:
we prove invariance of the effective resistance under Kron reduction (see Theorem III.8) and rigorously show under which
conditions a sparse topology becomes dense or even complete

154

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 60, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013

Fig. 2. a) Illustration of an integration chip with a symmetric top-level network
with 59 terminals. The Kron reduction of all interior nodes results in a Kronwith
non-zero entries. If all but
reduced matrix of dimension
five specifically chosen interior nodes are eliminated, then the Kron-reduced
but has only 1506 non-zero entries. The associated
matrix is of dimension
sparsity patterns are shown in subfigures b) and c), taken from [7].

(see Theorem III.4). Moreover, our setup encompasses shunt
loads and currents drawn from the interior network, thereby generalizing results in [4]–[6], [13].
D. Electrical Impedance Tomography
Electrical impedance tomography finds applications in geophysics and medical imaging, and its objective is to determine
the conductivity inside a planar spatial domain from simultaneous measurements of currents and voltages at the boundary
of , that is, from measurement of the Dirichlet-to-Neumann
map. A natural approach is a discretization of the spatial domain
to a resistor network with conductance matrix . As seen in
equation (2) with
, when a unit potential is imposed
at boundary node and a zero potential at all other boundary
nodes, the current measured at boundary node gives the reduced transfer conductance
. Other methods iteratively
construct the reduced impedance matrix
from measurements of the effective resistance
[23]. The goal is then to
, as ilinvert the Kron reduction and recover the from
lustrated in Fig. 3. This is feasible only for highly symmetric
networks [21]–[23], but generally it is not possible to infer structo .
tural properties from
This paper provides non-iterative identities relating the efand the Kron-reduced impedance
fective resistance matrix
as well as explicit identities relating and
matrix
for uniform networks (see Lemma III.10 and Theorem III.11).
Furthermore, our analysis allows to partially invert the Kron reto
duction by inferring from the spectrum or resistance of
the spectrum or resistance of (see Theorems III.5 and III.8).
Finally, our framework allows also for dissipation of energy in
the spatial domain via loads in the resistor network.
E. Sensitivity of Reduced Power Flow
Large-scale power transmission networks can be modeled as
circuits, with generators and load buses as nodes, see Fig. 4.
is weighted by a (typically inducEach transmission line
. Whereas generator injects a
tive) admittance
current
, the load at a bus draws a current
and
features a shunt admittance
. Hence, the power network
, where the nodal
obeys the current-balance equations
admittance matrix
is the loopy Laplacian induced by
the admittances
. Depending on the application, the current
balance equations are sometimes converted to the power flow
, where is the Hadamard product,
equations
denotes the conjugate transposed, and
is the vector
of power injections.

Fig. 3. In electric impedance tomography the conductivity of the planar spatial
is estimated by measuring the Kron-reduced matrix
at
domain
the boundary nodes . From these measurements the conductance matrix is
re-constructed and serves as a spatial discretization of .

A critical task in power network operation is monitoring and
control of the power flow. The determining equations
are too complicated to admit an analytic solution and
often too onerous for a computational approach [11], [12]. If
a set of nodes is identified for sensing or control purposes,
then all remaining nodes can be eliminated via Kron reduction
leading to the reduced current-balance equations (2). The corresponding reduced power flow is obtained as
, where
.
In the lossless case when is purely imaginary, this paper
provides insightful and explicit results showing how variations
in shunt and current loads affect the transfer admittance ma. For instance, any positive shunt load
in
trix
the non-reduced network weakens the mutual transfer admitin the reduced network and increases the retances
duced loads
(see Theorem III.6). We also show how
perturbations in weights or topology of affect the reduced net. For instance, we quantify the effect of a line outage
work
on the electrical proximity (measured in effective resistance) between nodes in the reduced network (see Theorem III.14).
F. Monitoring of DC Power Flow in Smart Grid
The linearized DC power flow equations are
, where
are the real power injections,
are the voltage phase angles, and
is
the susceptance matrix. Consider the problem of monitoring
an area of a smart power grid equipped with synchronized
bordering
phasor measurement units at the buses
[20]. Kron reduction of the DC power flow with respect to
the interior nodes
yields the reduced DC power flow
, where
and
are defined
analogously to
and
. From here various scalar stress
measures over the area can be defined [20]. Let
be
the indicator vector for the boundary buses , that is,
if
and zero otherwise. The cutset power flow over the
area
is
, the cutset suscep, and the corresponding cutset angle
tance is
is
. Hence, the area is reduced to two nodes
exchanging the power flow
with angle
over the
, see Fig. 5. These scalar quantities indicate the
susceptance
stress within the area . For instance, a large cutset angle
could be a blackout risk precursor. Of special interest are how
load changes, line outages, or loss of nodes within or on its
boundary affect the cutset angle
.
This paper provides a comprehensive and detailed analysis
of how changes in shunt loads, topology, and weighting of the
network affect the Kron-reduced matrix
(see Theorem III.6
and Theorem III.14). These results can be easily extended to

DÖRFLER AND BULLO: KRON REDUCTION OF GRAPHS WITH APPLICATIONS TO ELECTRICAL NETWORKS

Fig. 4. Single line diagram of the New England Power Grid [14], an equivalent
schematic representation with generators and buses , and the corresponding
Kron-reduced network.

The right-hand sides of conditions (9) and (10) measure the nonuniformity in effective power inputs, and the left-hand sides reflect the connectivity: the term
lower-bounds
and
is the
the smallest nodal degree
algebraic connectivity. In summary, conditions (9) and (10) read
as “the connectivity in the Kron-reduced network has to dominate the non-uniformity in effective power inputs.”
As drawback, conditions (9) and (10) are stated for the model
(8) defined for the Kron-reduced network. Under the realistic assumption of uniformly lower-bounded voltage levels at all generators
, this paper reveals that the spectral condition (9) in the reduced network can be converted to a spectral
condition in the original network (see Theorem III.5):

Fig. 5. Reduction of the area with boundary buses to a single line equivadescribing the electrical characteristics between the set of boundary
lent
and the set of boundary buses .
buses

analyze the sensitivity of the cutset angle
. Further research
on this specific aspect is currently carried out.
G. Transient Stability Assessment in Power Networks
Transient stability is the ability of a power network to remain in synchronism when subjected to large disturbances such
as faults of components or severe fluctuations in generation or
load. The governing equations are the generator rotor dynamics
as well as algebraic power flow equations. If the network is lossless with purely imaginary admittance matrix and the loads
are modeled as constant current injections and shunt admittances, the network can be reduced to the generators via Kron
reduction. In this case,
is also purely imaginary, and the
generators obey the dynamic swing equations [14]–[16]
(8)
are the rotor angle and speed of generator ,
are the inertia and damping, the coupling weight
is the maximum power transferred between generators and , and the effective power input
results from the
mechanical power input
and the current loads
. The
reduced model (8) is synchronized if all generating units rotate
at the same frequency
for all ,
.
An important problem in transient stability studies are concise conditions for synchronization as a function of the parameters and the topology of the electrical network. We stress that the
original physical model is differential-algebraic whereas the reduced model (8) is purely dynamic. Consequently, the analysis
is tractable for the reduced model (8), but the direct representation of the original network is lost.
In [45], we derived graph-theoretic conditions under which
the reduced model (8) synchronizes. For notational simplicity,
we assume uniform damping here, that is,
for all
.
Then two sufficient conditions for synchronization are
where
and

(9)
(10)

155

(11)
Here is the Laplacian of the original lossless power network
(weighted by
) and
is the th shunt load in the
reduced network. Similarly, if the effective resistance among all
generators takes the uniform value and the effective resistance
between the generators and the ground is uniform as well, then
Theorem III.11 in this paper reveals that the degree-dependent
condition (10) in the reduced network is rendered to a resistive
condition in the original network:
(12)
Conditions (11) and (12) state that the network connectivity has
to overcome the non-uniformity in effective power inputs and
the dissipation by the loads, such that the network synchronizes.
We refer to [15], [16] for a detailed presentation and analysis.
We conclude with a final remark. Clearly, the Kron reduction
problems described in the Section II-C through Section II-G are
well understood from an engineering and a physical perspective. Our proposed graph-theoretic perspective complements
this physical intuition with rigor, quantitative analysis and
additional understanding. Moreover, the graph-theoretic perspective is necessary in order to map results for the (virtual)
Kron-reduced network to the original (physical) network, for
example, see the synchronization conditions (9)–(12).
III. KRON REDUCTION OF GRAPHS
This section analyzes the algebraic, topological, spectral, and
sensitivity properties, as well as the effective resistance of the
Kron-reduced matrix
and its associated graph. Throughout
this section we assume that
is a symmetric and irreducible loopy Laplacian matrix (corresponding to an undirected,
connected, and weighted graph with nodes), and we let be
a proper subset of
with
.
A. The Augmented Laplacian and Iterative Kron Reduction
The concepts presented in this subsection will be central to
the subsequent developments both for illustration and analysis.
The role of the self-loops induced by a strictly loopy Laplacian
can be better understood by introducing the
additional grounded node with index
. Then the strictly

156

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 60, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013

Fig. 6. Illustration of the graph associated with the circuit from Fig. 1 and
the corresponding augmented graph with additional grounded node .

loopy Laplacian

is the principal
block embedded in the
dimensional augmented Laplacian matrix

Fig. 7. Sparsity pattern (or topolgical evolution) corresponding to the iterative
Kron reduction (15) of a graph with 3 boundary nodes and 7 interior nodes .
The dashed red lines indicate the newly added edges in a reduction step.

(13)

property 3), the upper left block of the matrix on the right-hand
side of identity (14) follows by writing out the Schur complement of a matrix partitioned in 3 3 blocks, as in the proof of
the Quotient Formula [42, Theorem 1.4]. The remaining blocks
follow immediately since Kron reduction of the loop-less Laplayields again a loop-less Laplacian by Lemma II.1.
cian
This completes the proof of property 3).
Gaussian elimination of the interior voltages from the current-balance equations
can either be performed via
Kron reduction in a single step, as in equation (2), or in multiple steps, each interior node
at a time.
The following concept addresses exactly this point.
Definition III.2 (Iterative Kron Reduction): Iterative Kron reduction associates to a symmetric irreducible loopy Laplacian
matrix
and indices
, a sequence of matrices
,
, defined by

is the adjacency matrix corresponding to .
where
The augmented Laplacian is the Laplacian of the augmented
with node set
and edge set
graph
. Here a node
is connected to the grounded
node
via a weighted edge
if and
only if
, see Fig. 6 for an illustration.
Lemma III.1 (Properties of the Augmented Laplacian): Consider the symmetric and irreducible strictly loopy Laplacian
and the corresponding augmented Laplacian matrix
. The following statements hold:
1) Algebraic properties: is an irreducible and symmetric
loop-less Laplacian matrix.
2) Spectral properties: The eigenvalues of and interlace
each other, that is,
.
3) Kron reduction: Consider the strictly loopy Laplacian
and the loop-less Laplacian
, both obtained by Kron reduction of the
interior nodes
. The following diagram commutes:

In equivalent words,
, that is,
ciated to

is the augmented Laplacian assotakes the form

(14)
Properties 2) and 3) of Lemma III.1 intuitively illustrate the
effect of self-loops on the spectrum of and its Kron-reduced
matrix. Specifically, the elegant relationship 3) implies that the
Kron reduction can be equivalently applied to the strictly loopy
network or to the augmented loop-less network .
Proof of Lemma III.1: Property 1) follows trivially from
the construction of the augmented Laplacian . Property 2) is
a direct application of the interlacing theorem for bordered masince
trices [43, Theorem 4.3.8], where
is an irreducible loop-less Laplacian and is non-singular. In

(15)
where
and
, that is,
is the lowest
diagonal entry of
.
If the sequence (15) is well-defined, then each
is a loopy
Laplacian matrix inducing a graph by Lemma II.1. Before going
further into the details of iterative Kron reduction, we illustrate
the unweighted graph corresponding to
(the sparsity pattern
of the corresponding adjacency matrix) in Fig. 7. When no selfloops are present, then the topological iteration illustrated in
Fig. 7 is also known under the name vertex elimination in the
sparse matrix community [26].
The following observations can be made from Fig. 7: (1) The
connectivity is maintained. (2) At the th reduction step a new
edge between two nodes appears if and only if both were connected to before the reduction, and (3) all other edges persist.
(4) Likewise, a new self-loop appears at a node
if and
only if was connected to and featured a self-loop before
the reduction. Theorem III.4 in Section III-A3 will turn these
observations into rigorous theorems.
In components,
is defined by the celebrated Kron reduction formula illustrating the step-wise Gaussian elimination:
(16)
, we let
and be the
For a well-defined sequence
corresponding adjacency and loop-less Laplacian matrix of the
th reduction step. The following lemma states some important
properties of the iterative Kron reduction.

DÖRFLER AND BULLO: KRON REDUCTION OF GRAPHS WITH APPLICATIONS TO ELECTRICAL NETWORKS

Lemma III.3 (Properties of Iterative Kron Reduction): Condefined via iterative Kron
sider the matrix sequence
reduction in equation (15). The following statements hold:
1) Well-posedness: Each matrix
,
,
is well defined, and the classes of loopy, strictly loopy,
and loop-less Laplacian matrices are closed throughout the
iterative Kron reduction.
2) Quotient property: The Kron-reduced matrix
can be obtained by iterative reduction of all
interior nodes
, that is,
. Equivalently, the following diagram commutes:

3) Diagonal dominance: For
sum of ,

the th row
, is given by
if

,

if

.

are non-decreasing.
Hence, the weights of the self-loops
Proof: Statement 2) is simply the Quotient Formula [42,
Theorem 1.4] stating that Schur complements (or Gaussian
elimination for that matter) can be taken iteratively or in a
single step. Furthermore, the Quotient Formula states that all
intermediate Schur complements
exist. This fact together
with the closure properties in Lemma II.1 proves statement 1).
For notational simplicity and without loss of generality, we
prove statement 3) for
and
. Note that
,
,
, and consider the th row sum of
given by

(17)
where we used equality (16), the identities
,
, and
. Since
(due to property 1) nonnegative row sums
follow also in the general case), we are left with evaluating
identity (17) for the two cases presented in statement 3).
B. Topological, Spectral, and Algebraic Properties
In this subsection we begin our characterization of the properties of Kron reduction. We start by discussing how the graph
topology of changes under the Kron reduction process.
Theorem III.4 (Topological Properties of Kron Reduction):
Let ,
, and be the undirected weighted graphs associated to ,
, and the augmented loopy Laplacian , respectively. The following statements hold:
1) Edges: Two nodes ,
are connected by an edge in
if and only if there is a path from to in whose
nodes all belong to
.

157

features a self-loop in
if
2) Self-loops: A node
and only if there is a path from to the grounded node
in whose nodes all belong to
.
features a self-loop in
if
Equivalently, a node
and only if features a self-loop in
or there is a path
from to a loopy interior node
whose nodes all
.
belong to
3) Reduction of connected components: If a set of interior
nodes
forms a connected subgraph of , then
form a clique in
the boundary nodes adjacent to in
. Moreover, if one node in features a self-loop in
, then all boundary nodes adjacent to in feature self.
loops in
The topological evolution of the graph corresponding to the
iterative Kron reduction (16) is illustrated in Fig. 7. Statement 1)
of Theorem III.4 can be observed in each reduction step, statement 2) is nicely visible in the third step, and statement 3) is
visible in the final step of the reduction in Fig. 7 as well as in
Figs. 1 and 4. We remark that Theorem III.4 is also partially
stated in [13], [26], [28], [31]. Given our prior results on iterative Kron reduction and the augmented Laplacian matrix, the
following proof is rather straightforward.
Proof of Theorem III.4: To prove statement 1), we initially
focus on the reduction of a single interior node via the one-step
iterative Kron reduction (16). Due to the closure of loopy Laplacian matrices under iterative Kron reduction, see Lemma III.3,
we restrict the discussion to the non-positive off-diagonal elements of
inducing the mutual edges in the graph.
Any non-zero and thus strictly negative element
is rendered to a strictly negative element
since the first term on
the right-hand side of equation (16) is strictly negative and the
second term is non-positive. Therefore, all edges in the graph
induced by
persist in the graph induced by
. According
to the iterative Kron reduction formula (16), a zero element
is converted into a strictly negative element
if
and only if both nodes and are adjacent to . Consequently, a
reduction of node leads to a complete graph among all nodes
that were adjacent to .
Recall from Lemma III.3 that the one-step reduction of all
interior nodes is equivalent to iterative reduction of each interior
node. Hence, the arguments of the previous paragraph can be
applied iteratively, which proves statement 1).
Statement 2) pertains to the diagonal elements. In the strictly
loopy case, it follows simply by applying the previous arguments to the augmented Laplacian defined in (13). Alternatively, an element-wise analysis of
together with statement
3) of Lemma III.3 lead to the same conclusion. In the loop-less
case, there will be no self-loops arising in the Kron iterative reduction by statement 1) of Lemma III.3.
Finally, statement 3) of Theorem III.4 follows by applying
statements 1) and 2) to the connected component .
By Theorem III.4, the topological connectivity among the
boundary nodes becomes only denser under Kron reduction.
Hence, the algebraic connectivity
—a spectral connectivity measure—should increase accordingly. Indeed, for the
graph in Fig. 7 (with initially unit weights) we have
. Physical intuition suggests that loads
in a circuit weaken the influence of nodes on another. Thus,
self-loops should weaken the reduced algebraic connectivity
accordingly. We can confirm these intuitions.

158

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 60, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013

Theorem III.5 (Spectral Properties of Kron Reduction): The
following statements hold for the spectrum of the Kron-reduced
matrix
:
1) Spectral interlacing: For any
it holds that
(18)
In particular, in the loop-less case, it follows for the algebraic connectivity that
.
it holds that
2) Effect of self-loops: For any
(19)
(20)
To illustrate the effect of self-loops, consider the graph in
Fig. 1 with zero-valued self-loops satisfying
. In the strictly loopy case inequalities (19)
and (20) imply that self-loops weaken the algebraic connectivity
tremendously.: the same graph (in Fig. 1) with unit-valued selfloops satisfies
.
Proof of Theorem III.5: To prove statement 1), recall the
spectral interlacing property [29, Theorem 3.1] for the spectrum
of a Hermitian matrix
and its Schur complement
(provided that
is nonsingular):
(21)
. Since
is a loopy Laplacian matrix and
where
hence positive semidefinite, the interlacing property (21) can be
applied with
and results in the bounds (18).
To prove statement 2), recall Weyl’s inequality [43, Theorem
4.3.1] for the spectrum of the sum of two Hermitian matrices ,
. Namely, for any
it holds that
(22)
Consider now the following set of spectral (in)equalities:

2) Monotonic increase of weights: For all ,
it
holds that
. Equivalently, it holds that
for all ,
.
, for
, so
3) Effect of self-loops I: Define
that loopy and loop-less Laplacians and are related by
. Then the Kron-reduced matrix
takes the form
(23)
where
is a symmetric nonnegative
matrix. Furthermore, the reduced self-loops satisfy
for
.
4) Effect of self-loops II: If the subgraph among the interior
nodes
is connected, each boundary node is connected to at least one interior node, and at least one of the
interior nodes has a positively weighted self-loop, then
and
are both positive matrices.
Statements 1) and 2) are not surprising given our knowledge
from Theorems III.4 and III.5. Statement 3) reveals an interesting fact that can be nicely illustrated by considering the reduction of a single interior node with a self-loop
.
In this case, the matrix
in identity (23) specializes to the
symmetric and nonnegative matrix
, where
. Hence,
the reduction of node decreases the mutual coupling
in
by the amount
and increases each selfby the corresponding amount
.
loop in
This argument can also be applied iteratively. In statement 4)
the reduction of a connected set of interior nodes implies that
a single positive self-loop in the interior network will affect the
entire reduced network by decreasing all mutual weights and increasing all self-loops weights.
For the proof of Theorem III.6, we recall the Sherman-Morrison identities for the inverse of the sum of two matrices.
Lemma III.7 (Sherman-Morrison Formula, [44]): Let ,
. If and
are nonsingular, then
(24)
If additionally

for

and ,

, then
(25)

where we made use of Weyl’s inequality (22) and the spectral
interlacing property (21). This proves the spectral bound (19).
The spectral bound (20) follows analogously.
In the following, we investigate the algebraic properties of
Kron reduction. The following theorem quantifies the topological properties in Theorem III.4 and the reduced self-loops occurring in Theorem III.5, and it shows that the edge weights
among the boundary nodes are non-decreasing, as seen in Fig. 1.
Furthermore, the following result shows the closure of connectivity under Kron reduction, and it reveals some more subtle
properties concerning the effect of self-loops.
Theorem III.6 (Algebraic Properties of Kron Reduction): Consider the Kron-reduced matrix
and the
and
accompanying matrices
. The following statements hold:
1) Closure of irreducibility (connectivity):
is irreducible if and only if is irreducible.

Proof of Theorem III.6: First we prove the sufficiency part
of statement 1). Let be irreducible. In the loop-less case, the
spectral inequality (18) in Theorem III.5 implies non-decreasing
algebraic connectivity
and thus irreducibility of
. In the strictly loopy case, note that the Kronreduced graph features the same edges (excluding self-loops) as
in the loop-less case, by Theorem III.4. Thus, irreducibility of
follows. The necessity part of statement 1) follows directly
from statement 1) of Theorem III.4.
To prove statement 2), we note that the element-wise bound
for ,
holds for the reduction of a
single node, see [46, Lemma 1]. By Lemma III.3, a one-step
reduction is equivalent to iterative one-dimensional reductions.
Hence, [46, Lemma 1], can be applied iteratively and yields
. For the negative off-diagonal elements, this
. The same bound
bound is readily converted to

DÖRFLER AND BULLO: KRON REDUCTION OF GRAPHS WITH APPLICATIONS TO ELECTRICAL NETWORKS

159

follows for the diagonal elements since diagonal dominance is
non-decreasing under Kron reduction, see Lemma III.3.
Identity (23) in statement 3) follows by expanding the Kronreduced matrix
and by applying the matrix identity (24)
with
and
as

where is defined statement 3). This proves identity (23).
is equivBy Lemma III.3, the Schur complement
alent to iterative one-dimensional reduction of all interior nodes
, and the matrix
at the th reduction
step is again a loopy Laplacian. If we abbreviate the self-loops
at the th reduction step by
, then
can be reformulated according to identity (23) as

Fig. 8. Illustration of Theorem III.8: According to statement 1), the effective
between the boundary nodes is equal when computed in the
resistance
or in the Kron-reduced graph
. According to statement 2), the
graph
is equal when computed in the strictly loopy graph
effective resistance
(respectively
) or in the augmented loop-less graph
(respectively
)
with grounded node . According to statement 3), the effective resistance
in the strictly loopy graphs
and
is not larger than in the loop-less graph
(with equality for
and strict inequality for
).

(28)
In other words, statements 1) and 2) imply that, if is a
strictly loopy Laplacian, then the following diagram commutes:

(26)
where

is the symmetric and nonnegative matrix

and
. Iterative application of
this argument shows that is symmetric and nonnegative.
To obtain an explicit expression for the reduced self-loops,
re-consider the identity (5) defining the self-loops of . In the
general loopy case identity (5) reads as
. BlockGaussian elimination of the interior nodes yields
. Hence, the th row sum of
satisfies
.
Under the assumptions of statement 4), the positivity of
follows from Lemma II.1. To prove positivity of , note that
iterative reduction of all but one interior node yields one remaining interior node
. According to equality
(26), reduction of this last node gives the matrix
. Theorem III.4 then implies that features a
self-loop and is connected to all boundary nodes. It follows that
and
for all
. Therefore,
is a positive matrix, and the same can be concluded for .
C. Kron Reduction and Effective Resistance
The physical intuition behind the Kron reduction and the effective resistance (see Remark I.1) suggests that the transfer
conductances
are related to the corresponding effective conductances
. The following theorem gives the exact
relation between the Kron-reduced matrix
, the effective resistance matrix , and the augmented Laplacian .
Theorem III.8 (Resistive Properties of Kron Reduction):
Consider the Kron-reduced matrix
, the
effective resistance matrix defined in (3), and the augmented
Laplacian defined in (13). The following statements hold:
1) Invariance under Kron reduction: The effective resistance
between any two boundary nodes is equal when
computed from or
, that is, for any ,

3) Effect of self-loops: If

is a strictly loopy Laplacian and
, ,
, is the effective resistance computed from the corresponding loop-less
Laplacian , then
for all ,
.
Theorem III.8 is illustrated in Fig. 8. Identity (27) states that
the effective resistances between the boundary nodes are invariant under Kron reduction of the interior nodes. Spoken in
terms of circuit theory, the effective resistance between the terminals can be obtained from either the impedance matrix
or the transfer impedance matrix
. Identity (28) gives a resistive interpretation of the self-loops: the effective resistance
among the nodes in a strictly loopy graph
is equivalent to
the effective resistance among the corresponding nodes in the
augmented loop-less graph . According to statement 3), the
self-loops do not increase the effective resistance, which is in
accordance with the physical interpretation in Remark I.1.
For the proof of Theorem III.8 we establish some identities
relating and via regularizations of the pseudo inverse.
Lemma III.9 (Laplacian and Effective Resistance Identities):
Let
be a symmetric irreducible loop-less Laplacian
matrix. Then for any
it holds that
(29)
Consider for ,

the effective resistance defined by
. For
it holds that

(27)
2) Invariance under augmentation: If is a strictly loopy
Laplacian, then the effective resistance
between any
two nodes ,
is equal when computed from or ,
that is, for any ,

If

, then, by taking node

as reference, it holds that

(30)
(31)

160

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 60, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013

Proof: Since

and
(by definition of
via the singular value decomposition, see also [38, Lemma 3]), identity (29) can be verified since
. The
identity (30) follows then by multiplying equation (29) from the
left by
and from the right by
.
. It follows from [41],
To prove identity (31), let
Appendix B, (17), that
. The
identity (31) can then be verified by direct computation.
Proof of Theorem III.8: We begin by proving statement 1)
in the strictly loopy case when is nonsingular. Note that we
are interested in the boundary nodes, that is, the
block of
. The celebrated Schur complement formula [42, Theorem
1.2], gives the
block of
as
. Consequently, for ,
the defining equation (3) for
the effective resistance
is simply rendered to
, which proves identity (27).
In the loop-less case when
is singular, a similar line
of arguments holds on the image of . Let
and consider
the modified and non-singular Laplacian
.
. We
Due to identity (29) we have that
can then rewrite identity (30) in expanded form as

(32)
As before, the
quently, for ,

block of
is
the identity (32) is rendered to

. Conse-

(33)
, the right-hand side of (32),
Since
or equivalently (33), is independent of since the matrices are
evaluated on the subspace orthogonal to , the nullspace of
as
. Thus, on the image of the limit of the right-hand side
of (33) exists as
. By definition,
acts as regular inverse
on the image of , and (33) is rendered to

which proves the claimed identity (27) in the loop-less case.
To prove statement 2), note that the strictly loopy Laplacian
is invertible. Hence, the defining equation (3) for the resistance
features a regular inverse. The matrix can also be seen as the
block of the augmented Laplacian , that is,
principal
. The identity (28) follows then directly
from identity (31) (with replaced by
).
To prove statement 3), we appeal to Rayleigh’s celebrated
monotonicity law and short/cut principle [40]. Since the Laplacian induces the same graph as with node
removed,
the monotonicity law states that the effective resistance
in
the graph induced by is greater or equal than the effective rein the graph induced by . The latter again equals
sistance
the effective resistance in the graph induced by due to identity (28), and statement 3) follows immediately.

Theorem III.8 allows to compute the effective resistance ma. We are now
trix from the transfer impedance matrix
from . Iterinterested in a converse result to construct
ative methods constructing
from can be found in [23].
However, it is also possible to recover the (pseudo) inverses of
the loopy Laplacian , the augmented Laplacian , or the corresponding Kron-reduced Laplacians directly from .
Lemma III.10 (Impedance and Effective Resistance Identities): Let
be a symmetric irreducible loopy Laplacian matrix. Consider the following three cases:
1) Loop-less case: Let
be the effective resistance
matrix. Then for ,
it holds that
(34)
2) Strictly loopy case: Consider the grounded node
, the corresponding augmented Laplacian matrix
defined in (13), and the corresponding
matrix of effective resistances
defined
in (3). Then the following two identities hold:

(35)
(36)
3) Kron reduced case: The identities (34), (35) and (36) also
hold when
,
, and
on the left-hand sides are
replaced by
,
, and
, respectively, and on
the right-hand sides is replaced by
.
Proof: Identity (34) is stated in [39, Theorem 4.8] for the
weighted case and in [47, Theorem 7] for the unweighted case.
According to statement 2) of Theorem III.8, the resistance is
invariant under augmentation. Hence, identity (34) applied to
the augmented Laplacian yields identity (35). Identity (36)
follows directly from [39, Theorem 4.9]. According to Theorem
III.8, the effective resistance is invariant under Kron reduction.
Thus, the effective resistance corresponding to
is simply
. Hence, the formulas (34), (35) and (36) can be applied
to the Kron-reduced matrix as stated in 3).
By Theorem III.8 and Lemma III.10, the effective resistance
matrix in the original non-reduced network can be computed
from the (pseudo) inverse of the Kron-reduced Laplacian
,
and vice versa. In some applications, it is desirable to know
an explicit algebraic relationship between and
without
the (pseudo) inverse. However, such an explicit relationship be,
,
tween can be found only if closed-form solutions of
or
are known. These are generally not available. Generally,
it is also infeasible to relate bounds on to bounds on
since element-wise bounding of inverses of interval matrices is
known to be NP-hard [48]. Fortunately, closed forms of
,
or
can be derived in an ideal electric network, with
uniform effective resistances among the boundary nodes as well
as between the boundary nodes and the ground. This ideal case
is equivalent to uniform transfer conductances (weights) in the
Kron-reduced network.

DÖRFLER AND BULLO: KRON REDUCTION OF GRAPHS WITH APPLICATIONS TO ELECTRICAL NETWORKS

Theorem III.11 (Equivalence of Uniformity in Effective Resistance and Kron Reduction): Consider the Kron-reduced Laplacian
and the corresponding adjacency matrix
. Consider the following two cases:
Loop-less case: Let
be the matrix of effective
resistances. Then the following two statements are equivalent:
1) The effective resistances among the boundary nodes
are uniform, that is, there is
such that
for all distinct ,
; and
2) The weighting of the edges in the Kron-reduced network is uniform, that is, there is
such that
for all distinct ,
.
If both statements 1) and 2) are true, then it holds that
.
Strictly loopy case: Consider additionally the grounded
and the augmented Laplacian matrices
node
and
defined in (13) and (14), respectively. Let
be the matrix of effective resistances
in the augmented network. Then the following two statements are equivalent:
1) The effective resistances both among the boundary
nodes and between all boundary nodes and the
grounded node
are uniform, that is, there is
and
such that
for all distinct ,
and
for all
; and
2) The weighting of the edges and the self-loops in the
Kron-reduced network is uniform, that is, there are
and
such that
and
for all distinct ,
.
If both statements 3) and 4) are true, then it holds that
and
.
Remark III.12 (Engineered Networks and Uniform Graph
Topologies): The uniformity assumption in statements 1) and
3) corresponds to an ideal network, where all boundary nodes
are electrically uniformly distributed with respect to each other
and with respect to the shunt loads. In the applications of
electrical impedance tomography and smart grid monitoring,
this assumption can be met by choosing the boundary nodes
corresponding to sensor locations. In the transient stability
problem, the generators corresponding to boundary nodes are
distributed over the power grid ideally in such a way that the
loads can be effectively and uniformly sustained. Hence, the
uniformity assumptions are ideally met in man-made networks.
Independently of engineered networks, uniform resistances
occur for various graph topologies, even when weights as additional degrees of freedom are neglected. In the trivial case,
, Theorem III.11 reduces to [10, Corollary 4.41] and the resistance among the boundary nodes is clearly uniform. Second,
if the boundary nodes are 1-connected leaves of a highly symmetric graph among the interior nodes, such as a star, a complete
graph, or a combination of these two, then the resistance among
the boundary nodes is uniform. Third, the effective resistance
in large random geometric graphs, small world networks, and
lattices and their fuzzes becomes uniform among sufficiently
distant nodes, see [16] for further details.
To prove Theorem III.11, we need the following identities.
These identities can be verified by direct computation.

161

Lemma III.13 (Inverses of Uniform Laplacian Matrices): Let
and
and consider the loopy Laplacian matrix
corresponding to a complete graph
with nodes, uniform positive edge weights
between
any two distinct nodes, and nonnegative and uniform self-loops
attached to every node. The following statements hold:
1) For zero self-loops
,
is the loop-less Laplacian

2) For positive self-loops

,

3) Consider the augmented Laplacian

Then

is the positive matrix

given by

is given by the (augmented) loop-less Laplacian

where
and
.
We now have all three ingredients to prove Theorem III.11:
the invariance formulas (27)–(28) for the effective resistance
stated in Theorem III.8, the relations between effective resistance and the Kron-reduced impedance matrix in statement 3)
of Lemma III.10, and the Laplacian identities in Lemma III.13.
Given these formulas, the proof of Theorem III.14 reduces to
mere computation. For the sake of brevity, it will be omitted.
D. Sensitivity of Kron Reduction to Perturbations
In the final subsection of our analysis we discuss the sensitivity of the Kron-reduced matrix
to perturbations in the
original matrix . A number of interesting perturbations can be
modeled by the perturbed matrix
, where is the
nominal loopy Laplacian and
is a symmetric matrix. The case when
is diagonal is fully discussed in Theorem
III.6. A perturbation of the form when
is a non-zero
matrix and all other entries of
are zero can model the emergence, loss, or change of a self-loop or an edge among boundary
nodes. Such a perturbation acts additively on
as
(37)
If the perturbation affects the interior nodes, then
is
a non-zero matrix. Inspired by [12], [13], we put more structure on the perturbation matrix
and consider symmetric rank
one perturbations of the form
,
where
. Such a perturbation changes the weight of the
edge
from
to
and also can model the loss or
emergence of the edge
. Since a perturbation among the
boundary nodes is fully captured by (37), we consider now perturbations of the edge between the th and th interior node.
Theorem III.14 (Perturbation of the Interior Network): Consider the Kron-reduced matrix
, the accompanying matrix
, and a symmetric
rank one perturbation

162

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 60, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013

for distinct ,
and such that the perturbed
matrix
remains an irreducible loopy Laplacian.
The following statements hold:
1) Algebraic perturbation:
undergoes the rank one
perturbation
given by
(38)
.
where
2) Resistive perturbation: Let and be the matrices of effective resistances corresponding to and , respectively.
For any ,
it holds that
(39)
(respectively
) then it holds that
(respectively
).
The term
in (38) is the effective resistance between
the perturbed nodes in the interior network. Likewise, the physical interpretation of the term
is well-known in network theory. The perturbation
has the same effect on the equations
as the current injection
, that is, the perturbation of
the interior edge
by a value is equivalent to injecting
the current
into the th interior node and
extracting it from the th interior node. In the reduced equations (2) the current injection translates to the current injection
at the boundary
nodes. The term
, known as sensitivity factor [12], [20], is the potential drop between nodes
and if a unit current is injected in the th interior node and extracted at the th interior node, see also Remark I.1.
Finally, we note that various interesting spectral bounds can
be derived from identity (38) by applying Weyl’s inequalities
(22), the interlacing inequalities (18), or [43, Theorem 4.3.4].
Proof of Theorem III.14: Since the perturbed matrix
is a symmetric and irreducible loopy Laplacian, the
Schur complement
exists by Lemma II.1.
By the matrix identity (25), the reduced matrix
further simplifies to identity (38) in statement 1). For the proof of statement
2), we initially consider the strictly loopy case. Here,
can be obtained from identity (25) as
If

A multiplication of
from the left by
and from
the right by
yields then identity (39). In the loop-less
case when
is singular, the same arguments can be applied
on the image of by considering the non-singular matrix
for
and identity (30). This results in the more
general identity (39). The second part of statement 2) follows
again from Rayleigh’s monotonicity law [40].
IV. CONCLUSIONS
We studied the Kron reduction process from the viewpoint
of algebraic graph theory. Our analysis is motivated by various
applications spanning from classic circuit theory over electrical
impedance tomography to power network applications and
Markov chains. Prompted by these applications, we presented

a detailed and comprehensive graph-theoretic analysis of Kron
reduction. In particular, we carried out a thorough topological,
algebraic, spectral, resistive, and sensitivity analysis. This
analysis led to novel results in algebraic graph theory and new
physical insights in the application domains of Kron reduction.
Of course, the results contained in this paper can and need to
be further refined to meet the specific problems in each application area. Our analysis also demands answers to further general
questions, such as the extension of this work to directed graphs
or complex-valued weights occurring in all disciplines of circuit theory. Whereas many of our results can be formally extended to directed and complex-weighted graphs, the resulting
formulas are cluttered and obscure the physical meaning, the
physical interpretation of certain concepts such as the effective
resistance is lost for directed graphs, and the spectra of the resulting non-symmetric (or complex-symmetric) Laplacian matrices are not necessarily real and thus hardly comparable. Finally, it would be of interest to analyze the effects of Kron
reduction on centrality measures, clustering coefficients, and
graph-theoretic distance measures.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Kron, Tensor Analysis of Networks. New York: Wiley, 1939.
[2] A. E. Kennelly, “The equivalence of triangles and three-pointed stars in
conducting networks,” Electr. World Eng., vol. 34, no. 12, pp. 413–414,
1899.
[3] A. Rosen, “A new network theorem,” J. Inst. Electr. Eng., vol. 62, no.
335, pp. 916–918, 1924.
[4] A. J. van der Schaft, “Characterization and partial synthesis of the behavior of resistive circuits at their terminals,” Syst. Contr. Lett., vol.
59, no. 7, pp. 423–428, 2010.
[5] J. C. Willems and E. I. Verriest, “The behavior of resistive circuits,”
in Proc. IEEE Conf. Decision and Control and Chinese Control Conf.,
Shanghai, China, Dec. 2009, pp. 8124–8129.
[6] J. C. Willems, “Terminals and ports,” IEEE Circuits Syst. Mag., vol.
10, no. 4, pp. 8–26, 2010.
[7] J. Rommes and W. H. A. Schilders, “Efficient methods for large resistor
networks,” IEEE Trans. Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits
and Systems, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 28–39, 2009.
[8] C. S. Amin, M. H. Chowdhury, and Y. I. Ismail, “Realizable reduction
of interconnect circuits including self and mutual inductances,” IEEE
Trans. Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, vol.
24, no. 2, pp. 271–277, 2005.
[9] W. N. Anderson, Jr, “Shorted operators,” SIAM J. Appl. Math., vol. 20,
pp. 520–525, 1971.
[10] P. E. T. Jorgensen and E. P. J. Pearse, “Operator Theory of Electrical
Resistance Networks,” 2009 [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/
0806.3881
[11] J. B. Ward, “Equivalent circuits for power-flow studies,” Trans. Am.
Inst. Electr. Eng., vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 373–382, 2009.
[12] A. J. Woods and B. F. Wollenberg, Power Generation, Operation, and
Control, 2nd ed. New York: Wiley, 1996.
[13] B. Ayazifar, “Graph Spectra and Modal Dynamics of Oscillatory Networks,” Ph.D. dissertation, Mass. Inst. Technol., Cambridge, 2002.
[14] M. A. Pai, Energy Function Analysis for Power System Stability.
Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic, 1989.
[15] F. Dörfler and F. Bullo, “Spectral analysis of synchronization in a
lossless structure-preserving power network model,” in IEEE Int.
Conf. Smart Grid Communications, Gaithersburg, MD, Oct. 2010, pp.
179–184.
[16] F. Dörfler and F. Bullo, “Synchronization of power networks: Network
reduction and effective resistance,” in IFAC Workshop on Distributed
Estimation and Control in Networked Systems, Annecy, France, Sep.
2010, pp. 197–202.
[17] R. C. Degeneff, M. R. Gutierrez, S. J. Salon, D. W. Burow, and R. J.
Nevins, “Kron’s reduction method applied to the time stepping finite
element analysis of induction machines,” IEEE Trans. Energy Conv.,
vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 669–674, 2002.
[18] K. Strunz and E. Carlson, “Nested fast and simultaneous solution for
time-domain simulation of integrative power-electric and electronic
systems,” IEEE Trans. Power Del., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 277–287, 2006.

DÖRFLER AND BULLO: KRON REDUCTION OF GRAPHS WITH APPLICATIONS TO ELECTRICAL NETWORKS

[19] A. Davoudi, “Reduced-order modeling of power electronics components and systems,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, 2010.
[20] I. Dobson, “Voltages across an area of a network,” IEEE Trans. Power
Syst., 2011, preprint, to appear.
[21] L. Borcea, V. Druskin, and F. G. Vasquez, “Electrical impedance tomography with resistor networks,” Inverse Problems, vol. 24, no. 3,
pp. 035013–035013, 2008.
[22] E. B. Curtis and J. A. Morrow, Inverse Problems for Electrical Networks. Singapore: World Scientific Publishing, 2000.
[23] E. Curtis, E. Mooers, and J. Morrow, “Finding the conductors in circular networks from boundary measurements,” RAIRO—Modélisation
Mathématique et Analyse Numérique, vol. 28, no. 7, pp. 781–814,
1994.
[24] M. Fiedler, “Inversion of bigraphs and connection with the Gaussian
elimination,” in Graphs, Hypergraphs and Block Systems, Zielona
Gora, Czechoslovakia, 1976, pp. 57–68.
[25] J. R. Gilbert, “Predicting structure in sparse matrix computations,”
SIAM J. Matrix Analysis and Applications, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 62–79,
1994.
[26] D. J. Rose and R. E. Tarjan, “Algorithmic aspects of vertex elimination,” in ACM Symp. Theory of Computing, 1975, pp. 245–254.
[27] C. Wagner, W. Kinzelbach, and G. Wittum, “Schur-complement multigrid,” Numerische Mathematik, vol. 75, no. 4, pp. 523–545, 1997.
[28] M. Fiedler, Special Matrices and their Applications in Numerical
Mathematics. Leiden, The Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff, 1986.
[29] Y. Fan, “Schur complements and its applications to symmetric nonnegative and -matrices,” Linear Algebra Applicat., vol. 353, no. 1–3,
pp. 289–307, 2002.
[30] E. A. Stone and A. R. Griffing, “On the Fiedler vectors of graphs that
arise from trees by Schur complementation of the Laplacian,” Linear
Algebra Applicat., vol. 431, no. 10, pp. 1869–1880, 2009.
[31] J. J. McDonald, M. Neumann, H. Schneider, and M. J. Tsatsomeros,
“Inverse M-matrix inequalities and generalized ultrametric matrices,”
in Linear Algebra Applicat., 1995, vol. 220, pp. 321–341.
[32] D. A. Bini and B. Meini, “The cyclic reduction algorithm: From
Poisson equation to stochastic processes and beyond,” Numerical
Algorithms, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 23–60, 2009.
[33] C. D. Meyer, “Stochastic complementation, uncoupling Markov
chains, and the theory of nearly reducible systems,” SIAM Rev., vol.
31, no. 2, pp. 240–272, 1989.
[34] C. D. Meyer, “Uncoupling the Perron eigenvector problem,” in Linear
Algebra Applicat., 1989, vol. 114–115, pp. 69–94.
[35] M. Neumann, “Inverses of Perron complements of inverse M-matrices,” in Linear Algebra Applicat., 2000, vol. 313, pp. 163–171.
[36] L. Yen, M. Saerens, and F. Fouss, “A link-analysis extension of correspondence analysis for mining relational databases,” IEEE Trans.
Knowledge Data Eng., vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 481–495, 2011.
[37] J. H. H. Perk and H. Au-Yang, “Yang-Baxter equations,” in Encyclopedia of Mathematical Physics, J.-P. Françoise, G. L. Naber, and S. T.
Tsun, Eds. New York: Elsevier, 2006, pp. 465–473.
[38] I. Gutman and W. Xiao, “Generalized inverse of the Laplacian matrix
and some applications,” Bulletin: Classe des Sciences Mathématiques
et Natturalles Sciences Mathématiques, vol. 129, no. 29, pp. 15–23,
2004.
[39] E. Bendito, A. Carmona, A. M. Encinas, and J. M. Gesto, “Characterization of symmetric M-matrices as resistive inverses,” Linear Algebra
Applicat., vol. 430, no. 4, pp. 1336–1349, 2009.
[40] P. G. Doyle and J. L. Snell, Random Walks and Electric Networks.
Washington, DC: Math. Assoc. America, 1984.

163

[41] F. Fouss, A. Pirotte, J. M. Renders, and M. Saerens, “Random-walk
computation of similarities between nodes of a graph with application
to collaborative recommendation,” IEEE Trans. Knowledge Data Eng.,
vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 355–369, 2007.
[42] F. Zhang, The Schur Complement and Its Applications. New York:
Springer, 2005.
[43] R. A. Horn and C. R. Johnson, Matrix Analysis. Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge Univ.y Press, 1985.
[44] H. V. Henderson and S. R. Searle, “On deriving the inverse of a sum
of matrices,” SIAM Rev., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 53–60, 1981.
[45] F. Dörfler and F. Bullo, “Synchronization and transient stability in
power networks and non-uniform Kuramoto oscillators,” SIAM J. Control and Optimization, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 1616–1642, 2012.
[46] D. E. Crabtree, “Applications of M-matrices to nonnegative matrices,”
Duke Math J., vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 197–208, 1966.
[47] W. Xiao and I. Gutman, “Resistance distance and Laplacian spectrum,”
Theoretical Chemistry Accounts, vol. 110, no. 4, pp. 284–289, 2003.
[48] G. E. Coxson, “Computing exact bounds on elements of an inverse interval matrix is NP-hard,” Reliable Comput., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 137–142,
1999.

Florian Dörfler received his Diplom degree in Engineering Cybernetics from the University of Stuttgart,
Germany, in 2008. He is a Doctoral candidate in mechanical engineering at the University of California
at Santa Barbara.
He is affiliated with the Center for Nonlinear
Studies at the Los Alamos National Laboratories.
His main research interest is networked control
theory with applications in power systems and
robotic coordination.
Dr. Dörfler was the recipient of the 2009 Regents
Special International Fellowship, the 2011 Peter J. Frenkel Foundation Fellowship, the 2010 American Control Conference Student Best Paper Award, and
the 2011 AACC O. Hugo Schuck Best Paper Award.

Francesco Bullo (S’95–M’99–SM’03–F’10) received a Laurea in Electrical Engineering from the
University of Padova in 1994, and a Ph.D. in Control
and Dynamical Systems from the California Institute
of Technology in 1999.
He is a Professor with the Mechanical Engineering
Department at the University of California, Santa
Barbara. From 1998 to 2004, he was affiliated with
the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. His
students’ papers were finalists for the Best Student
Paper Award at the IEEE Conference on Decision
and Control (2002, 2005, 2007), and the American Control Conference (2005,
2006, 2010). He is the coauthor of the books Geometric Control of Mechanical Systems (Springer, 2004) and Distributed Control of Robotic Networks
(Princeton, 2009). His main research interest is multi-agent networks with
applications to robotic coordination, power systems and distributed computing.
Dr. Bullo is a recipient of the 2003 ONR Young Investigator Award, the 2008
IEEE CSM Outstanding Paper Award and the 2011 AACC Hugo Schuck Best
Paper Award.

