Advances in Mathematics 226 (2011) 176–205
www.elsevier.com/locate/aim

Weakly group-theoretical and solvable fusion categories
Pavel Etingof a,∗ , Dmitri Nikshych b , Victor Ostrik c
a Department of Mathematics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
b Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of New Hampshire, Durham, NH 03824, USA
c Department of Mathematics, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA

Received 31 July 2009; accepted 7 June 2010
Available online 8 July 2010
Communicated by Roman Bezrukavnikov
To Izrail Moiseevich Gelfand on his 95th birthday with admiration

Abstract
We introduce two new classes of fusion categories which are obtained by a certain procedure from finite
groups – weakly group-theoretical categories and solvable categories. These are fusion categories that are
Morita equivalent to iterated extensions (in the world of fusion categories) of arbitrary, respectively solvable
finite groups. Weakly group-theoretical categories have integer dimension, and all known fusion categories
of integer dimension are weakly group-theoretical. Our main results are that a weakly group-theoretical
category C has the strong Frobenius property (i.e., the dimension of any simple object in an indecomposable
C-module category divides the dimension of C), and that any fusion category whose dimension has at
most two prime divisors is solvable (a categorical analog of Burnside’s theorem for finite groups). This
has powerful applications to classification of fusion categories and semsisimple Hopf algebras of a given
dimension. In particular, we show that any fusion category of integer dimension < 84 is weakly grouptheoretical (i.e. comes from finite group theory), and give a full classification of semisimple Hopf algebras
of dimensions pqr and pq 2 , where p, q, r are distinct primes.
© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Fusion categories; Braided fusion categories; Categorical Morita equivalence; Solvable fusion categories;
Group-theoretical fusion categories; Semisimple Hopf algebras

* Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: etingof@math.mit.edu (P. Etingof), nikshych@math.unh.edu (D. Nikshych),
vostrik@math.uoregon.edu (V. Ostrik).
0001-8708/$ – see front matter © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.aim.2010.06.009

P. Etingof et al. / Advances in Mathematics 226 (2011) 176–205

177

1. Introduction and main results
The goal of this paper is to introduce and study two classes of fusion categories (over C):
weakly group-theoretical categories and solvable categories.
Namely, recall [20] that a fusion category C is said to be nilpotent if there is a sequence of
fusion categories C0 = Vec, C1 , . . . , Cn = C and a sequence G1 , . . . , Gn of finite groups such
that Ci is obtained from Ci−1 by a Gi -extension (i.e., Ci is faithfully graded by Gi with trivial
component Ci−1 ). Let us say that C is cyclically nilpotent if the groups Gi can be chosen to be
cyclic (or, equivalently, cyclic of prime order).
Definition 1.1. A fusion category C is weakly group-theoretical if it is Morita equivalent to a
nilpotent fusion category.1
Here the notion of Morita equivalence means the same as weak monoidal Morita equivalence
introduced by M. Müger in [27]. This is a categorical analogue of the familiar notion of Morita
equivalence for rings.
Definition 1.2. A fusion category C is solvable2 if any of the following two equivalent conditions
is satisfied3 :
(i) C is Morita equivalent to a cyclically nilpotent fusion category;
(ii) there is a sequence of fusion categories C0 = Vec, C1 , . . . , Cn = C and a sequence G1 , . . . , Gn
of cyclic groups of prime order such that Ci is obtained from Ci−1 either by a Gi equivariantization or as a Gi -extension.
Thus, the class of weakly group-theoretical categories contains the classes of solvable and
group-theoretical categories (i.e. those Morita equivalent to pointed categories, see [14] and Section 2.5 below). In fact, it contains all fusion categories we know which are weakly integral, i.e.,
have integer Frobenius–Perron dimension.
Our first main result is the following characterization of fusion categories Morita equivalent
to group extensions of a given fusion category.
Theorem 1.3. Let D be a fusion category and let G be a finite group. A fusion category C
is Morita equivalent to a G-extension of D if and only if its Drinfeld center Z(C) contains a
Tannakian subcategory E = Rep(G) such that the de-equivariantization of E by E is equivalent
to Z(D) as a braided tensor category.
The precise definition of de-equivariantization can be found in Section 2.6 below and in [9,
Section 4]. In the context of modular categories it is the modularization construction introduced
by A. Bruguières [3] and M. Müger [28].
1 It will be shown in a subsequent paper that a weakly group-theoretical category is in fact Morita equivalent to a

nilpotent category of nilpotency class n = 2, i.e., to a group extension of a pointed category. This should allow one to
describe weakly group-theoretical categories fairly explicitly in group-theoretical terms.
2 This definition is motivated by the fact the category Rep(G) of representations of a finite group G is solvable if and
only if G is a solvable group.
3 The equivalence of these two conditions is proved in Proposition 4.4.

178

P. Etingof et al. / Advances in Mathematics 226 (2011) 176–205

In the special case when G is the trivial group, Theorem 1.3 simply says that two fusion
categories are Morita equivalent if and only if their centers are equivalent as braided categories
(Theorem 3.1). This important result, which answers a question of V. Drinfeld, has been announced by A. Kitaev and M. Müger, and is used in the proof of the more general Theorem 1.3.
Since, as far as we know, a proof of this result is unavailable in the literature, we give such a proof
in the beginning of Section 3. That Morita equivalent fusion categories have braided equivalent
centers was shown by Müger in [27]; we prove the opposite implication.
Our second main result may be viewed as a strong form of Kaplansky’s 6-th conjecture (stating
that the dimension of an irreducible representation of a semisimple Hopf algebra divides the
dimension of the Hopf algebra) for weakly group-theoretical fusion categories. To state it, we
need the following definition.
Definition 1.4. We will say that a fusion category C has the strong Frobenius property if for every
FPdim(C )
is
indecomposable C-module category M and any simple object X in M the number FPdim(X)
an algebraic integer, where the Frobenius–Perron dimensions in M are normalized in such a way
that FPdim(M) = FPdim(C).
Obviously, the strong Frobenius property of a fusion category implies the usual Frobenius
property, i.e. that the Frobenius–Perron dimension of any simple object divides the Frobenius–
Perron dimension of the category (indeed, it suffices to take M = C).
Theorem 1.5. Any weakly group-theoretical fusion category has the strong Frobenius property.
Finally, our third main result is an analog of Burnside’s theorem for fusion categories.
Theorem 1.6. Any fusion category of Frobenius–Perron dimension p r q s , where p and q are
primes, and r, s are nonnegative integers, is solvable.
Theorems 1.5 and 1.6 and the intermediate results used in their proofs provide powerful methods for studying weakly group-theoretical and solvable fusion categories, in particular those of
dimension p r q s , and of (quasi-)Hopf algebras associated to them. As an illustration, we show
that any non-pointed simple weakly group-theoretical fusion category is equivalent to Rep(G)
for a finite non-abelian simple group G, and that any fusion category of dimension 60 is weakly
group-theoretical (in particular, if it is simple, it is equivalent to Rep(A5 )). We also show that any
fusion category of dimension pqr (where p, q, r are distinct primes) and any semisimple Hopf
algebra of dimension pqr or pq 2 is group-theoretical, and classify such Hopf algebras. However,
most of such applications will be discussed in future publications. In particular, the classification
of fusion categories of dimension pq 2 , where q and p are primes, is given in the paper [22] (as
pointed out in [14], not all such categories are group-theoretical, already for p = 2).
The structure of the paper is as follows. In Section 2, we discuss preliminaries. In Section 3
we prove Theorem 1.3. In Section 4, we state and prove the basic properties of weakly grouptheoretical and solvable fusion categories. In Section 5, we describe module categories over
equivariantizations; this description needed for the proof of Theorem 1.5. In Section 6, we prove
Theorem 1.5. In Section 7, we prove some important properties of non-degenerate and slightly
degenerate categories containing a simple object of prime power dimension, which are needed
for the proof of Theorem 1.6. In particular, Corollary 7.2 is similar to the classical Burnside
Lemma in the theory of group representations. In Section 8, we prove Theorem 1.6. In Section 9,

P. Etingof et al. / Advances in Mathematics 226 (2011) 176–205

179

we discuss applications of our results to concrete problems in the theory of fusion categories and
Hopf algebras. In Section 10 we briefly discuss the relation between our results and classification
results on semisimple Hopf algebras and fusion categories available in the literature. Finally, in
Section 11 we formulate some open questions.
2. Preliminaries
In this paper, we will freely use the basic theory of fusion categories, module categories over
them, Frobenius–Perron dimensions, and modular categories. For basics on these topics, we refer the reader to [2,41,14,9].4 However, for reader’s convenience, we recall some of the most
important definitions and facts that are used below.
2.1. Graded categories [14,20]
Let C be a fusion category and let G be a finite group. We say that C is graded by G if
C = g∈G Cg , and for any g, h ∈ G, one has ⊗ : Cg × Ch → Cgh , ∗ : Cg → Cg −1 . The fusion
category Ce corresponding to the neutral element e ∈ G is called the trivial component of the Ggraded category C. A grading is faithful if Cg = 0 for all g ∈ G. If C is faithfully graded by G, one
says that C is a G-extension of Ce . The adjoint category Cad is the smallest fusion subcategory of
C containing all objects X ⊗ X ∗ , where X ∈ C is simple.
There exists a unique faithful grading of C for which Ce = Cad . It is called the universal
grading of C. The corresponding group is called the universal grading group of C, and denoted
by UC . All faithful gradings of C are induced by the universal grading, in the sense that for any
faithful grading UC canonically projects onto the grading group G, and Ce contains Cad .
A fusion category C is said to be nilpotent if it can be reduced to the category of vector spaces
by iterating the operation of taking the adjoint category. This is equivalent to the condition that
C can be included into a chain Vec = C0 ⊂ C1 ⊂ · · · ⊂ Cn = C, where each Ci is faithfully graded
by a finite group Gi , and has trivial component Ci−1 .
The simplest example of a nilpotent category is a pointed category, i.e. a fusion category
where all simple objects are invertible. Such a category is the category of vector spaces graded by
some finite group G with associativity defined by a cohomology class ω ∈ H 3 (G, C∗ ), denoted
by VecG,ω . If ω = 1, we denote this category by VecG .
2.2. Frobenius–Perron dimensions in a module category
Let C be a fusion category, and M an indecomposable module category over C. Let Mi ,
i ∈ I , be the simple objects of M. Then it follows from the Frobenius–Perron theorem that
there exists a unique, up to a common factor, collection of positive numbers di , i ∈ I , such
that whenever X ∈ C, and X ⊗ Mi = j ∈I Nij (X)Mj , one has FPdim(X)di = j ∈I Nij (X)dj .
We will normalize di in such a way that i∈I di2 = FPdim(C). The numbers di normalized in
such a way are called the Frobenius–Perron dimensions of Mi . By additivity, this defines the
Frobenius–Perron dimension of any object of M.
4 All fusion categories and (quasi-)Hopf algebras in this paper will be over C (which can be replaced by any algebraically closed field of characteristic zero). All module categories will be left module categories. For a fusion category
C we use notation Z(C) for its Drinfeld center (see e.g. [9, §2.9]).

180

P. Etingof et al. / Advances in Mathematics 226 (2011) 176–205

2.3. Weakly integral and integral categories
A fusion category is said to be weakly integral, if its Frobenius–Perron dimension is an integer.
Recall [14, Proposition 8.27] that in such a category, the Frobenius–Perron dimension of any
simple object is the square root of an integer.
A fusion category is called integral if the Frobenius–Perron dimension of every (simple) object is an integer. A weakly integral fusion category is automatically pseudounitary and has a
canonical spherical structure with respect to which categorical dimensions coincide with the
Frobenius–Perron dimensions [14, Propositions 8.23, 8.24].
2.4. Tannakian categories
Recall [5] that a symmetric fusion category C is Tannakian if it is equivalent to the representation category of a finite group as a symmetric fusion category. More generally, let us say that C
is super-Tannakian if there exists a finite group G and a central element u ∈ G of order 2, such
that C, as a symmetric category, is equivalent to the category of representations of G on super
vector spaces, on which u acts by the parity operator.
Theorem 2.1. (See Deligne’s theorem, [6].) Any symmetric fusion category is super-Tannakian.
In particular, if C has Frobenius–Perron dimension bigger than 2, then it contains a nontrivial
Tannakian subcategory (the category of representations of G/(u)).
2.5. Morita equivalence [27]; see also [14,41]
∗ )op for some
One says that two fusion categories C and D are Morita equivalent if D ∼
= (CM
indecomposable C-module category M (the category of C-module endofunctors of M, with
opposite composition). Equivalently, there is an algebra A in C such that D is equivalent to the
category of A-bimodules in C.
The above is an equivalence relation on fusion categories of a given Frobenius–Perron dimension. A fusion category is said to be group-theoretical if it is Morita equivalent to a pointed
category. A (quasi-)Hopf algebra is group-theoretical if its representation category is grouptheoretical.

2.6. Equivariantization and de-equivariantization [3,28] and [9, Section 4]
Let C be a fusion category with an action of a finite group G. In this case one can define the
fusion category C G of G-equivariant objects in C. Objects of this category are objects X of C
equipped with an isomorphism ug : g(X) → X for all g ∈ G, such that
ugh ◦ γg,h = ug ◦ g(uh ),
where γg,h : g(h(X)) → gh(X) is the natural isomorphism associated to the action. Morphisms
and tensor product of equivariant objects are defined in an obvious way. This category is called
the G-equivariantization of C. One has FPdim(C G ) = |G| FPdim(C).

P. Etingof et al. / Advances in Mathematics 226 (2011) 176–205

181

For example, VecG = Rep(G) (for the trivial action of G on Vec). A more interesting example
is the following. Let K be a normal subgroup of G. Then we have a natural action of G/K on
Rep(K), and Rep(K)G/K = Rep(G).
There is a procedure opposite to equivariantization, called the de-equivariantization. In the
context of modular categories it is the modularization construction introduced by A. Bruguières
and M. Müger, see Remark 2.3 below. It is also closely related to the dynamical extensions of
monoidal categories of J. Donin and A. Mudrov [7].
Namely, let C be a fusion category and let E = Rep(G) ⊂ Z(C) be a Tannakian subcategory which embeds into C via the forgetful functor Z(C) → C. Let A be the algebra in Z(C)
corresponding to the algebra Fun(G) of functions on G under the above embedding. It is a commutative algebra in Z(C) and so the category CG of left A-modules in C is a fusion category,
called de-equivariantization of C by E. The free module functor C → CG : X → A ⊗ X is a
surjective tensor functor. One has FPdim(CG ) = FPdim(C)/|G|.
The above constructions are canonically inverse to each other, i.e., there are canonical equivalences (CG )G ∼
= C and (C G )G ∼
= C. See [9, Proposition 4.19].
2.7. The crossed product fusion category
Let C be a fusion category, and G a finite group acting on C. Then the crossed product category
G is defined as follows [43].
For a pair of Abelian categories A1 , A2 , let A1 A2 denote their Deligne’s tensor product [5].5 We set C G = C VecG as an Abelian category, and define a tensor product by
C

(X

g) ⊗ (Y

h) := X ⊗ g(Y )

gh,

Then M = C is naturally a module category over C

(1)

G and we have the following result.

Proposition 2.2. (See [40, Proposition 3.2].) C G ∼
= (C
In other words, the crossed product category C
respect to the C G -module category C.

X, Y ∈ C, g, h ∈ G.

∗op

G)M .

G is dual to the equivariantization C G with

2.8. The Müger centralizer [29]
Let C be a braided fusion category, and D ⊂ C a full subcategory. The Müger centralizer D
of D in C is the category of all objects Y ⊂ C such that for any X ⊂ D the squared braiding on
X ⊗ Y is the identity. The Müger center of C is the Müger centralizer C of the entire category C.
The category C is non-degenerate (in the sense of Müger) if C = Vec. If C is a non-degenerate
braided fusion category then one has FPdim(D) FPdim(D ) = FPdim(C) (see [29, Theorem 3.2]
and [9, Theorem 3.14]). If C is non-degenerate then D ⊂ C is called Lagrangian if D = D .
Remark 2.3. (See [3,28].) Let C be a braided fusion category and let E ⊂ C be a Tannakian
subcategory. Then the de-equivariantization of C by E is a braided fusion category. It is nondegenerate if and only if E = C .
5 For semisimple categories A , the Deligne tensor product A
i
1
X1 ⊗ X2 , where Xi ∈ Ai are simple.

A2 is just the category whose simple objects are

182

P. Etingof et al. / Advances in Mathematics 226 (2011) 176–205

Note that if C is a weakly integral non-degenerate category, then by a result of [14], it is
pseudounitary, which implies that it is canonically a modular category. This fact will be used
throughout the paper.
2.9. Müger’s theorem [29, Theorem 4.2], [9, Theorem 3.13]
Theorem 2.4. Let C be a braided category, and D a non-degenerate subcategory in C. Then C is
naturally equivalent, as a braided category, to D D .
2.10. Slightly degenerate categories
Definition 2.5. A braided fusion category C is called slightly degenerate if its Müger center C is
equivalent, as a symmetric category, to the category SuperVec of super vector spaces.
Proposition 2.6.
(i) (cf. [26, Lemma 5.4]) Let C be a braided fusion category such that its Müger center C
contains SuperVec (for example, a slightly degenerate category). Let χ be the invertible
object generating SuperVec ⊆ C , and let Y be any simple object of C. Then χ ⊗ Y is not
isomorphic to Y .
(ii) Let C be slightly degenerate and pointed. Then C = SuperVec C0 , where C0 is a nondegenerate pointed category.
Proof. (i) Assume the contrary, i.e., χ ⊗Y = Y . Since χ centralizes Y , we have from this identity
that the trace T of the Drinfeld isomorphism u : Y → Y ∗∗ is equal to −T (as u|χ = −1). This is
a contradiction, as T = 0.
(ii) This statement is proved in [9, Corollary A.19]. We provide a proof here for the reader’s
convenience. Our job is to show that χ = ξ ⊗2 for any ξ (this is the condition for the group
of invertible objects of C to be the direct product of the Z/2Z generated by χ with another
subgroup). Assume the contrary, and let Q be the quadratic form defining the braiding. Then we
have Q(ξ )4 = Q(χ) = −1, Q(χ ⊗ ξ ) = Q(ξ ⊗3 ) = Q(ξ )9 = Q(ξ ), so the squared braiding of ξ
and χ is
βχ,ξ = Q(χ ⊗ ξ )/Q(χ)Q(ξ ) = −1,
which is a contradiction with the centrality of χ .

✷

Note that if C is a weakly integral braided category, then it is pseudounitary, and hence is
canonically a ribbon category [14]. By the S-matrix of a ribbon category C we understand a
square matrix S := {sX,Y } whose columns and rows are labeled by simple objects of C and the
entry sX,Y is equal to the quantum trace of cY,X cX,Y : X ⊗ Y → X ⊗ Y , where c denotes the
braiding of C.
Corollary 2.7. If C is a weakly integral slightly degenerate braided category, then the S-matrix
of C is S = I ⊗ S , where S is a non-degenerate matrix with orthogonal rows and columns, and
I is the 2 by 2 matrix consisting of ones.

P. Etingof et al. / Advances in Mathematics 226 (2011) 176–205

183

Proof. This is an easy consequence of Proposition 2.6(i) since the rows and columns of S corresponding to 1 and χ coincide. ✷
Corollary 2.8. Let C be a slightly degenerate integral category of dimension > 2. Then C contains
an odd-dimensional simple object outside of the Müger center C of C.
Proof. Let χ be the invertible object generating C . Let X be any simple object outside of C . By
Proposition 2.6(i), χ ⊗ X = X, which implies that X ⊗ X ∗ does not contain χ . Thus, either X
itself is odd-dimensional, or X ⊗ X ∗ /1 is odd-dimensional, and is a direct sum of simple objects
not contained in C . In this case one of the summands has to be odd-dimensional. ✷
2.11. Interpretation of extensions and equivariantizations in terms of the center [3,26,28,9,19]
Proposition 2.9. Let C be a fusion category.
(i) If Z(C) contains a Tannakian subcategory Rep(G) which maps to Vec under the forgetful
functor Z(C) → C then C is a G-extension of some fusion category D.
(ii) Let C be a G-extension of D. Then Z(C) contains a Tannakian subcategory E = Rep(G)
mapping to Vec in C, such that the de-equivariantization of E by E is equivalent to Z(D) as
a braided tensor category.
Proof. (i) Suppose there is a Tannakian subcategory E = Rep(G) ⊂ Z(C) such that the restriction of the forgetful functor F : Z(C) → C maps E to Vec. Then every simple object X of C
determines a tensor automorphism of F |E as follows. Given an object Y in E, the permutation
∼
→
F (Y ) ⊗ X defining the central structure of Y yields an autoisomorphism ηX,Y : X ⊗ F (Y ) −
morphism ηX,Y ◦ δ of F (Y ) ⊗ X, where δ : F (Y ) ⊗ X → X ⊗ F (Y ) is the “trivial” isomorphism,
coming from the fact that F (Y ) ∈ Vec. Since EndC (F (Y ) ⊗ X) = EndC F (Y ), we obtain a linear
automorphism iX : F (Y ) → F (Y ). Clearly, iX gives rise to a tensor automorphism of F |E . Since
the group of tensor automorphisms of F |E is isomorphic to G, we have a canonical assignment
X → iX ∈ G. It is multiplicative in X (in the sense that iZ = iX iY for any simple Z ⊂ X ⊗ Y ),
and thus defines a grading C = g∈G Cg .
Now note that every simple object of the center Z(C) of a graded category C is either supported on its trivial component or is disjoint from it. By construction, E coincides with the
category Z(C)e of objects of Z(C) supported on Ce (indeed, X is in E iff iX is identity). Therefore, F restricts to a surjective functor E → Ce . Using the identity in [14, proof of Corollary 8.11]
we obtain
FPdim(Ce ) =

FPdim(E ) FPdim(C)
=
,
FPdim(C)
|G|

which means that the above grading of C is faithful.
(ii) This statement is proved in [19], we include its proof for the reader’s convenience. Suppose C = g∈G Cg with Ce = D. We construct a subcategory E ⊂ Z(C) as follows. For any
representation π : G → GL(V ) of G consider an object Yπ in Z(C) where Yπ = V ⊗ 1 as an
object of C with the permutation isomorphism
cYπ ,X := π(g) ⊗ idX : Yπ ⊗ X ∼
= X ⊗ Yπ ,

when X ∈ Cg ,

(2)

184

P. Etingof et al. / Advances in Mathematics 226 (2011) 176–205

where we identified Yπ ⊗ X and X ⊗ Yπ with V ⊗ X. Let E be the fusion subcategory of
Z(C) consisting of objects Yπ , where π runs through all finite-dimensional representations of G.
Clearly, E is equivalent to Rep(G) with its standard braiding.
By construction, the forgetful functor maps E to Vec and E consists of all objects in Z(C)
whose forgetful image is in Ce . Consider the surjective braided functor H : E → Z(Ce ) obtained by restricting the braiding of X ∈ E from C to Ce . One can check that H can be factored
through the de-equivariantization functor E → EG (see [3, Theorem 3.1]). This yields a braided
equivalence between EG and Z(Ce ), since the two categories have equal Frobenius–Perron dimension. ✷
The following Proposition 2.10 can be derived from [3,26,27]. Again, we include the proof
for the reader’s convenience.
Proposition 2.10.
(i) If Z(C) contains a Tannakian subcategory Rep(G) which embeds to C under the forgetful
functor Z(C) → C then C is a G-equivariantization of some fusion category D.
(ii) Let C be a G-equivariantization of D. Then Z(C) contains a Tannakian subcategory E =
Rep(G) such that the de-equivariantization of E by E is equivalent to Z(D) as a braided
tensor category.
Proof. (i) Let A = Fun(G) be the algebra of functions on G. It is a commutative algebra in Z(C).
Therefore, the category D := CG of A-modules in C is a fusion category. The action of G on A
via right translations gives rise to an action of G on D. It is straightforward to check that the
corresponding equivariantization of D is equivalent to C (see Section 2.6 and [9, Section 4.2]).
(ii) By Proposition 2.2 DG is Morita equivalent to a G-graded fusion category D G whose
trivial component is D. Hence Z(C) ∼
= Z(D G) and the required statement follows immediately from Proposition 2.9(ii). ✷
2.12. The divisibility theorems
Theorem 2.11. (See [10, Lemma 1.2] and [14, Propositions 8.23, 8.24, 8.27].)
(i) Let C be a weakly integral non-degenerate braided category. Then for any simple object
X ∈ C, the ratio FPdim(C)/ FPdim(X)2 is an integer.
(ii) Let C be a weakly integral braided fusion category. Then for any simple object X ∈ C, the
ratio FPdim(C)/ FPdim(X) is the square root of an integer.
Theorem 2.12. (See [14, Corollary 8.11, Proposition 8.15].) The Frobenius–Perron dimension
of a full fusion subcategory or a component in a quotient category of a fusion category C divides
the Frobenius–Perron dimension of C in the ring of algebraic integers.
2.13. Kac algebras (Abelian extensions) [32]
Let G be a finite group, and G = KL be an exact factorization of G into a product of
two subgroups K, L (exactness means that K ∩ L = 1). Let ω ∈ Z 3 (G, C∗ ) be a 3-cocycle,
and ψ : C 2 (K, C∗ ), φ ∈ C 2 (L, C∗ ) be 2-cochains such that dψ = ω|K , dφ = ω|L . Consider

P. Etingof et al. / Advances in Mathematics 226 (2011) 176–205

185

the fusion category C = VecG,ω,K,ψ of (K, ψ)-biequivariant (G, ω)-graded vector spaces (see
[41,42]). This category has a module category M of (G, ω)-graded vector spaces which are
equivariant under (K, ψ) on the left, and under (L, φ) on the right. This module category has
only one simple object, so it defines a fiber functor on C, hence a group-theoretical Hopf algebra
H = H (G, K, L, ω, ψ, φ) with Rep(H ) = C. This Hopf algebra is an Abelian extension
C → Fun(L) → H → C[K] → C,
and is sometimes called a Kac algebra.
3. Proof of Theorem 1.3
We start with the following characterization of Morita equivalence of fusion categories in
terms of their centers.
Theorem 3.1. Two fusion categories C and D are Morita equivalent if and only if Z(C) and
Z(D) are equivalent as braided tensor categories.
Proof. By the result of Müger [27, Remark 3.18] Morita equivalent fusion categories have
braided equivalent centers. Thus we need to prove the opposite implication.
Given an algebra A in a fusion category C let A-modC and A-bimodC denote, respectively, the
categories of right A-modules and A-bimodules in C. In the case when the category C is braided
and the algebra A is commutative, the category A-modC has a natural structure of tensor category,
see e.g. [3]. Namely any M ∈ A-modC can be turned into A-bimodule using the morphism A ⊗
cA,M
M −−−→ M ⊗ A → M and the tensor product on A-modC is defined to be tensor product ⊗A
over A, see e.g. [41].
For a fusion category C let FC : Z(C) → C and IC : C → Z(C) denote the forgetful functor
and its right adjoint. The following lemma is a special case of a more general result obtained
in [4].
Lemma 3.2.
(i) The object A = IC (1) ∈ Z(C) has a natural structure of commutative algebra; moreover for
any X ∈ C the object IC (X) has a natural structure of right A-module.
(ii) The functor IC induces an equivalence of tensor categories C A-modZ (C ) .
Proof. Consider the category C as a module category over Z(C) via the functor FC . Then [15,
Lemma 3.38] says that IC (X) = Hom(1, X) for any X ∈ C. Thus A = IC (1) = Hom(1, 1) has a
natural structure of algebra in Z(C); for any X ∈ C the object IC (X) = Hom(1, X) is naturally
right A-module and the functor IC (?) = Hom(1, ?) induces an equivalence of categories C
A-modZ (C ) , see [15, Theorem 3.17]. It remains to explain that A is a commutative algebra and
that the functor IC has a structure of tensor functor.
It follows from definitions (see [15,41]) that the multiplication on the algebra A can be
described as follows. Let μ ∈ Hom(FC (IC (1)), 1) be the image of id under the canonical isomorphism Hom(IC (1), IC (1)) Hom(FC (IC (1)), 1). The multiplication morphism m : A ⊗ A → A
is the image of μ ⊗ μ under the isomorphism Hom(FC (IC (1)) ⊗ FC (IC (1)), 1) Hom(IC (1) ⊗
IC (1), IC (1)). By definition the commutativity of A means that m ∈ Hom(IC (1) ⊗ IC (1), IC (1))

186

P. Etingof et al. / Advances in Mathematics 226 (2011) 176–205

is invariant under the action of the braiding permuting two copies of IC (1). Using the definition
of m we see that this is equivalent to the invariance of μ ⊗ μ ∈ Hom(FC (IC (1)) ⊗ FC (IC (1)), 1)
under the braiding cA,A permuting the two copies of FC (IC (1)) ∈ C (note that FC (IC (1)) has
a canonical lift to Z(C), namely A = IC (1), so we can talk about the braiding). The naturality of the braiding with a central object implies the commutativity of the following diagram:
cA,A

FC (IC (1)) ⊗ FC (IC (1))

FC (IC (1)) ⊗ FC (IC (1))

id ⊗μ

FC (IC (1)) ⊗ 1

μ⊗id
id

FC (IC (1))

id

1 ⊗ FC (IC (1))

(3)

id ⊗μ

μ⊗id

1⊗1
Applying the functor Hom(?, 1) to this diagram we obtain the desired invariance of μ ⊗ μ.
For any X ∈ C let μX : FC (IC (X)) → X be the image of id under the canonical isomorphism
Hom(IC (X), IC (X)) Hom(FC (IC (X)), X) (so we have μ1 = μ in the notation used above)
and for X, Y ∈ C let μX,Y : IC (X) ⊗ IC (Y ) → IC (X ⊗ Y ) be the image of μX ⊗ μY under the
canonical isomorphism Hom(FC (IC (X)) ⊗ FC (IC (Y )), X ⊗ Y ) Hom(IC (X) ⊗ IC (Y ), IC (X ⊗
Y )) (in the notation above μ1,1 = m is the multiplication morphism on A = IC (1) and μX,1
is the morphism making IC (X) into right A-module). It is straightforward to verify that μX,Y
satisfies all the axioms of a tensor functor except for being an isomorphism. In particular, the
morphism μ1,X makes IC (X) into left A-module; moreover μ1,X and μX,1 make IC (X) into
A-bimodule. The diagram similar to (3) shows that μ1,X can be described as a composition
cA,IC (X)
μX,1
−→ IC (X) ⊗ A −−−→ IC (X), so the structure of IC (X) as A-bimodule is the
A ⊗ IC (X) −−−−
same as the structure used in the definition of tensor structure on A-modZ (C ) .
It is immediate to check that μX,Y factorizes through the canonical map IC (X) ⊗ IC (Y ) →
μ˜ X,Y

IC (X) as IC (X) ⊗ IC (Y ) → IC (X) ⊗A IC (Y ) −−−→ IC (X ⊗ Y ) and that μ˜ X,Y satisfies all the
axioms of a tensor functor with a possible exception of being an isomorphism. Finally one verifies that for X = FC (Z) with Z ∈ Z(C) we have IC (X) = Z ⊗ A (as A-modules) and under
this isomorphism μ˜ X,Y goes to the canonical isomorphism IC (X) ⊗A IC (Y ) = Z ⊗ IC (Y )
IC (FC (Z) ⊗ Y ) from [15, Proposition 3.39(iii)]. Since the functor FC is surjective (see [15,
Proposition 3.39(i)]) we get that μ˜ X,Y is always an isomorphism. Thus the isomorphisms μ˜ X,Y
define a tensor structure on the functor IC and lemma is proved. ✷
Let C, D be fusion categories such that there is a braided tensor equivalence a : Z(C) ∼
= Z(D).
Since ID (1) is a commutative algebra in Z(D) and a is a braided equivalence, we have that
L := a −1 (ID (1)) is a commutative algebra in Z(C). Furthermore,
D∼
= L-modZ (C )
as a fusion category.

(4)

P. Etingof et al. / Advances in Mathematics 226 (2011) 176–205

187

Note that L is indecomposable in Z(C) but might be decomposable as an algebra in C, i.e.,
L=

Li ,
i∈J

where Li , i ∈ J , are indecomposable algebras in C such that the multiplication of L is zero on
Li ⊗ Lj , i = j (e.g., if C = Rep(G) then L = Fun(G, k) with the adjoint action of G and J is
the set of conjugacy classes of G). 6
We would like to show that for each i ∈ J :
Li -bimodC ∼
= L-modZ (C ) .

(5)

In view of (4) this will mean that D is dual to C with respect to the C-module category Li -modC
for any i ∈ J .
Consider the following commutative diagram of tensor functors:
Z→Z⊗Li

Z(C)

Z(Li -bimodC )
FLi -bimodC

Z→Z⊗L

L-modZ (C )

FC

Li -bimodC ⊂ L-bimodC

πi

Li -bimodC .

Here πi is a projection from L-bimodC = ij (Li − Lj )-bimodC to its (i, i) component. We
have πi (X ⊗ L) = X ⊗ Li for all X ∈ C. The top arrow is an equivalence by [27, Remark 3.18]
(see also [15, Corollary 3.35]) and the forgetful functor Z(Li -bimodC ) → Li -bimodC (the right
down arrow) is surjective. Hence, the composition Fi := πi FC of the functors in the bottom row
is surjective. But Fi is a tensor functor between fusion categories of equal Frobenius–Perron
dimension and hence it is an equivalence by [15, Proposition 2.20]. ✷
Remark 3.3.
(1) The above characterization of Morita equivalence was announced earlier and independently
by A. Kitaev and M. Müger.
(2) For group-theoretical categories Theorem 3.1 was proved in [31].
(3) A crucial idea of the proof of Theorem 3.1 (which is to consider a commutative algebra
L ∈ Z(C) as an algebra in C) also appears in [24, Theorem 3.22].
Lemma 3.4. Let G be a finite group, let D be a G-extension of a fusion category D0 , and let
D0 be a fusion category Morita equivalent to D0 . There exists a G-extension D of D0 which is
Morita equivalent to D.
Proof. Let A be an indecomposable algebra in D0 such that D0 is equivalent to the category
of A-bimodules in D0 . Observe that the tensor category D = A-bimodD of A-bimodules in D
6 Here and below we abuse notation and write L for an object of Z(C) and its forgetful image in C.

188

P. Etingof et al. / Advances in Mathematics 226 (2011) 176–205

inherits the G-grading (since A belongs to the trivial component of D). Since the category of
A-modules in D is indecomposable, D is a fusion category. ✷
We are now ready to prove Theorem 1.3.
Suppose C is Morita equivalent to a G-extension C of D. By [27, Remark 3.18] there is
a braided tensor equivalence Z(C) ∼
= Z(C). By Proposition 2.9(ii) Z(C) contains a Tannakian
subcategory E = Rep(G) with the specified property, as desired.
Conversely, suppose that Z(C) contains a Tannakian subcategory E = Rep(G) such that the
de-equivariantization Z of E by E is equivalent to Z(D) as a braided tensor category. Let
I : D → Z(D) ∼
= Z be the composition of the left adjoint of the forgetful functor Z(D) → D
with the equivalence Z(D) ∼
= Z. Then A1 := I (1) is a commutative algebra in Z. Let J : Z =
A1 -modE → E be the functor forgetting the A1 -module structure then A := J (A1 ) is a commutative algebra in E and, hence, in Z(C).
It was explained in [9] that for every Z ∈ Z(C) the object Z ⊗ A has a structure of an object in
the center of A-modC and that the functor Z(C) → Z(A-modC ) : Z → A ⊗ Z is a braided tensor
equivalence. By Theorem 3.1 C and A-modC are Morita equivalent.
The composition Z(C) ∼
= Z(A-modC ) → A-modC identifies with the free A-module functor. This functor takes E = Rep(G) ⊂ Z(A-modC ) to Vec. By Proposition 2.9 A-modC is a
G-extension of some fusion category D and there is a braided tensor equivalence Z(D) ∼
= Z(D).
By Theorem 3.1 D and D are Morita equivalent. So D is Morita equivalent to a G-extension of D
by Lemma 3.4, as required.
4. Properties of weakly group-theoretical and solvable fusion categories
4.1. Properties of weakly group-theoretical categories
The basic properties of weakly group-theoretical fusion categories (see Definition 1.1) are
summarized in the following two Propositions.
Proposition 4.1. The class of weakly group-theoretical categories is closed under taking extensions, equivariantizations, Morita equivalent categories, tensor products, the center, subcategories and component categories of quotient categories.
Proof. The invariance under taking Morita equivalent categories and tensor products is obvious. The invariance under taking extensions follows from Lemma 3.4 and the invariance under
equivariantizations follows from Proposition 2.2. The invariance under taking the center then
follows from Morita invariance, as Z(C) is Morita equivalent to C C op . The rest of the proof
is similar to the proof of Proposition 8.44 in [14]. Namely, to prove the invariance under taking
subcategories, let C be a weakly group-theoretical category, and D ⊂ C a fusion subcategory. Let
∗ is nilpotent. Then every component
M be an indecomposable C-module category such that CM
∗
category of DM is nilpotent, since it is easy to see that every component category in a quotient
of a nilpotent category is nilpotent. The case of a component in a quotient category reduces to
the case of a subcategory by taking duals. ✷
Proposition 4.2. A fusion category C is weakly group-theoretical if and only if there exists a
sequence of non-degenerate braided categories
Vec = D0 , D1 , . . . , Dn = Z(C)

P. Etingof et al. / Advances in Mathematics 226 (2011) 176–205

189

and finite groups G1 , . . . , Gn , such that for all 1 i n, the Tannakian category Rep(Gi ) is
contained in Di as an isotropic subcategory, and Di−1 is the de-equivariantization of the Müger
centralizer Rep(Gi ) of Rep(Gi ) in Di .
Proof. To proof the “only if” part it suffices to assume that C is nilpotent. Suppose first that C is
a G-extension of another category D. By Proposition 2.9 Z(C) contains a Tannakian subcategory
Rep(G) such that the de-equivariantization of Rep(G) by Rep(G) is Z(D). Since every nilpotent
category is obtained from Vec by a sequence of extensions, this implies the desired statement.
To prove the “if” part, we argue by induction in n. For n = 1 we must have a Lagrangian
subcategory Rep(G1 ) ⊂ Z(C) and so C is group-theoretical by [8, Corollary 4.14]. Suppose
the statement is true for n = l and let Vec = D0 , D1 , . . . , Dl+1 = Z(C) be a sequence as in the
statement of the proposition. By Theorem 1.3 C is Morita equivalent to a G1 -extension of a fusion
category C such that Z(C) is braided equivalent to the de-equivariantization of Rep(G1 ) by
Rep(G1 ) in D1 . By induction, C is weakly group-theoretical, hence C is weakly group-theoretical
by Proposition 4.1. ✷
Remark 4.3. Note that the class of group-theoretical categories is not closed under taking extensions and equivariantizations, see [40] and [14, Remark 8.48].
4.2. Properties of solvable fusion categories
Let C be a fusion category.
Proposition 4.4. The following conditions are equivalent:
(1) C is solvable in the sense of Definition 1.2(i).
(2) Z(C) admits a chain as in Proposition 4.2, where all the groups Gi are cyclic of prime order.
(3) There is a sequence of fusion categories C0 = Vec, C1 , . . . , Cn = C and a sequence
G1 , . . . , Gn of cyclic groups of prime order such that Ci is obtained from Ci−1 either by
a Gi -equivariantization or as a Gi -extension.
Proof. (1) ⇒ (2) This follows by iterating Proposition 2.9.
(2) ⇒ (3) We argue by induction in n. Consider the image of Rep(Gn ) in C under the forgetful
functor Z(C) → C. Since Gn is cyclic of prime order, either Rep(Gn ) maps to Vec, in which
case C is a Gn -extension of some category D by Proposition 2.9(i), or Rep(Gn ) embeds into C,
in which case C is a Gn -equivariantization of some category D by Proposition 2.10(i). In both
cases, Z(D) = Dn−1 , and by the induction assumption D satisfies (3), so we are done.
(3) ⇒ (1) By Proposition 2.2 Ci is Morita equivalent to a Gi -extension of Ci−1 , i = 1, . . . , n.
Combining induction with Lemma 3.4 we see that C is Morita equivalent to a cyclically nilpotent
fusion category, i.e., C is solvable. ✷
Proposition 4.5.
(i) The class of solvable categories is closed under taking extensions and equivariantizations
by solvable groups, Morita equivalent categories, tensor products, center, subcategories and
component categories of quotient categories.
(ii) The categories V ecG,ω and Rep(G) are solvable if and only if G is a solvable group.

190

P. Etingof et al. / Advances in Mathematics 226 (2011) 176–205

(iii) A braided nilpotent fusion category is solvable.
(iv) A solvable fusion category C = Vec contains a nontrivial invertible object.
Proof. (i) As in the proof of Proposition 4.1, everything follows from the easy fact that a component category in a quotient of a cyclically nilpotent category is cyclically nilpotent.
(ii) One direction is obvious, since if G is solvable, VecG,ω is cyclically nilpotent. Since
Rep(G) is Morita equivalent to VecG it is also solvable by (i).
To prove the converse implication it suffices to show that if Rep(G) is solvable then so is G.
Indeed, Z(VecG,ω ) contains Rep(G) as a fusion subcategory, so the solvability of VecG,ω implies
solvability of Rep(G) by (i). We have two possibilities: either Rep(G) is an H -extension or
Rep(G) = C H for some fusion category C, where H is a cyclic group of prime order. In the
former situation G must have a nontrivial center Z and we can pass to the fusion subcategory
Rep(G/Z) ⊂ Rep(G) which is again solvable by (i). In the latter situation Rep(G) contains a
fusion subcategory of prime order by Proposition 2.9(i), therefore, G contains a normal subgroup
G1 of prime index and we can pass to the solvable quotient category Rep(G1 ). So the required
statement follows by induction.
(iii) Follows from [8, Theorem 6.12] combined with [14, Theorem 8.28].
(iv) The proof is by induction in the dimension of C. The base of induction is clear, and only
the induction step needs to be justified. If C is an extension of a smaller solvable category D,
then either D = Vec and the statement follows from the induction assumption, or D = Vec and C
is pointed, so the statement is obvious. On the other hand, if C is a Z/p-equivariantization of a
smaller solvable category D, then Rep(Z/p) sits inside C, so we are done. ✷
Remark 4.6.
(1) Note that a non-braided nilpotent fusion category need not be solvable (e.g., VecG for a
non-solvable group G).
(2) The notion of a solvable fusion category is close in spirit to the notions of upper and lower
solvable and semisolvable Hopf algebras introduced by Montgomery and Witherspoon [30].
However, we would like to note that a semisimple Hopf algebra H such that Rep(H ) is
solvable in our sense is not necessarily upper or lower semisolvable in the sense of [30].
For example, Galindo and Natale constructed in [17] self-dual Hopf algebras without nontrivial normal Hopf subalgebras as twisting deformations of solvable groups. Clearly, the
representation category of any such Hopf algebra is solvable. It is also easy to construct an
example of an upper and lower solvable semisimple Hopf algebra H , such that Rep(H ) is
not solvable. For this, it suffices to take the Kac algebra associated to the exact factorization
of groups A5 = A4 · Z/5Z.
5. Module categories over equivariantized categories
Let C be a fusion category and let G be a finite group acting on C. In this section we obtain a
description of module categories over the equivariantization C G .
Let M be a C-module category, and let t be a tensor autoequivalence of C. Define a twisted
C-module category Mt by setting Mt = M as an Abelian category and defining a new action
of C:
X ⊗t M := t (X) ⊗ M,

P. Etingof et al. / Advances in Mathematics 226 (2011) 176–205

191

for all objects M in M and X in C, cf. [40]. Given a C-module functor F : M → N , we define a
C-module functor F t : Mt → N t in an obvious way. Given a natural transformation ν : F → G
between C-module functors F, G : M → N we define a natural transformation ν t : F t → Gt .
Remark 5.1. If A is an algebra in C such that M is equivalent to the category of A-modules in C
then Mt is equivalent to the category of t (A)-modules in C.
An action of a group G on C gives rise to C-module equivalences
Γg,h : Mh

g

∼
= Mgh ,

g, h ∈ G.

Definition 5.2. A G-equivariant C-module category is a pair consisting of a C-module category
∼
M along with C-module equivalences Ug : Mg −
→
M, g ∈ G, and natural isomorphisms of
∼
g
→ Ug (Uh ) , g, h ∈ G, satisfying the following compatibility
tensor functors μg,h : Ugh Γg,h −
conditions:
μf,g (Uh )fg ◦ (μfg,h Γf,g ) = Uf (μg,h )f ◦ (μf,gh Γg,h ),

f, g, h ∈ G.

(6)

Definition 5.3. Let M be a G-equivariant C-module category. An equivariant object in M is a
∼
pair consisting of an object M of M along with isomorphisms vg : Ug (M) −
→
M, g ∈ G, such
that the diagrams
Ug (Uh (M))

Ug (vh )

vg

μg,h (M)

Ugh (M)

Ug (M)

vgh

M

commute for all g, h ∈ G.
Let H be a subgroup of G and let M be an H -equivariant C-module category. Let MH
denote the category of equivariant objects in M. Then MH is a C G -module category. Namely,
the equivariant structure on X ⊗ M, where X is an object of C G and M is an object of MH , is
given by the product of equivariant structures of X and M.
Proposition 5.4. Every indecomposable C G -module category is equivalent to one of the
form MH , where H is a subgroup of G, and M is an H -equivariant indecomposable C-module
category.
Proof. Consider the crossed product category C G (see Section 2.7). Indecomposable (C G)module categories were studied in [40]. Every such module category N decomposes into a direct
sum of C-module categories N = s∈S Ns , where S is a homogeneous G-set. Let H be the
stabilizer of s ∈ S so that S ∼
= G/H . It follows that M := Ns is an H -equivariant C-module
category which completely determines N . By Proposition 2.2, any indecomposable C G -module
category is equivalent to the category of (C G)-module functors from C to N for some N as
above. It is easy to see that such functors correspond to equivariant objects in M. ✷

192

P. Etingof et al. / Advances in Mathematics 226 (2011) 176–205

Example 5.5. Let C = Vec. We have Vec G = VecG and VecG = Rep(G). An H -equivariant
Vec-module category is nothing but a 2-cocycle μ ∈ Z 2 (H, C∗ ). An equivariant object in this
category is the same thing as a projective representation of H with the Schur multiplier μ. Thus,
our description agrees with that of [42].
6. Proof of Theorem 1.5
Let C be a fusion category, and let M be an indecomposable module category over C. We
will denote the Frobenius–Perron dimension of X ∈ M normalized as in Definition 1.4 by
FPdimM (X).
Definition 6.1. Let m = 0 be an algebraic integer. Let us say that a fusion category C has the
strong m-Frobenius property if for any indecomposable C-module category M and any simple
X ∈ M, the ratio

FPdim(C )
m FPdimM (X)

is an algebraic integer.

Proposition 6.2. Let C be a fusion category having the strong m-Frobenius property, and let G
be a finite group. Then:
(1) a G-equivariantization of C has the √
strong m-Frobenius property, and
(2) a G-extension of C has the strong m |G|-Frobenius property.
Proof. (1) By Proposition 5.4 every indecomposable C G -module category M is equivalent
to N H , where H is a subgroup of G and N is an H -equivariant indecomposable C-module
category. For any simple object X in M = N H choose and fix its simple constituent Y in N . Let
Stab(Y ) denote the stabilizer of Y in H . Then X corresponds to an irreducible representation π
of Stab(Y ) and
FPdimN (X) = deg(π) H : Stab(Y ) FPdimN (Y ).

(7)

We claim that
FPdimM (X)
=
FPdimN (X)

[G : H ].

(8)

Indeed, we have
FPdimN (X)2 =
X

deg(π)2

2

H : Stab(Y ) FPdimN (Y )2

π

Y

H : Stab(Y ) FPdimN (Y )2

= |H |
Y

= |H | FPdim(C).
On the other hand, X FPdimM (X)2 = FPdim(C G ) = |G| FPdim(C). Combining these two
equations we obtain (8). Comparing with (7) we see that

P. Etingof et al. / Advances in Mathematics 226 (2011) 176–205

FPdim(C G )
=
FPdimM (X)

193

√
FPdim(C)
[G : H ]| Stab(Y )|
×
,
deg(π)
FPdimN (Y )

and so C G has the strong m-Frobenius property.
(2) Let D = g∈G Dg , De = C, be a G-extension of C, and let M be an indecomposable
D-module category. Let M = s∈S Ms be its decomposition as a C-module category. It was
shown in [20] that S is a homogeneous G-set and FPdim(Ms )/ FPdim(Mt ) = 1 for all s, t ∈ S.
Let H ⊂ G be a subgroup such that S = G/H . Then for any simple object X in Ms we have
√
FPdimM (X)
FPdimM (X) = |H |, and therefore,
s

|G|
FPdim(D)
FPdim(C)
=√
,
×
FPdimM (X)
|H | FPdimMs (X)
√
and so D has the strong m |G|-Frobenius property.

✷

Lemma 6.3. Let D be a non-degenerate braided fusion category containing a Tannakian subcategory E = Rep(G). Let Z be the de-equivariantization of E by E. Then D is equivalent, as a
fusion category, to a G-equivariantization of a G-extension of Z.
Proof. Let A = Fun(G) be the algebra of functions on G. The category DG of A-modules in C
is faithfully G-graded with the trivial component Z, and D is a G-equivariantization of DG , see
[23,28]. ✷
Corollary
√ 6.4. Let C be a weakly group-theoretical fusion category. Then its center Z(C) has the
strong FPdim(C)-Frobenius property.
Proof. It follows from Proposition 4.2 and Lemma 6.3 that there exists a sequence of finite
groups G1 , . . . , Gn such that Z(C) can be obtained from Vec by the following sequence of
2n operations: G1 -extension, G1 -equivariantization, . . . , Gn -extension, Gn -equivariantization.
Therefore, the result follows from Proposition 6.2. ✷
Now we are in a position to prove Theorem 1.5. Let C be a weakly group-theoretical fusion
category, and let M be an indecomposable module category over C. Let M be the pullback
of M under the forgetful functor√Z(C) → C. Then it is obvious that for any X ∈ M, one
has FPdimM (X) = FPdimM (X) FPdim(C). On the other hand, Corollary 6.4 implies that
√
FPdim(C)2 / FPdimM (X) is an algebraic integer divisible by FPdim(C). This implies that
FPdim(C)/ FPdimM (X) is an algebraic integer, i.e., C has the strong Frobenius property.
7. Non-degenerate and slightly degenerate categories with a simple object of prime power
dimension
In this section we will prove several results on non-degenerate and slightly degenerate braided
categories containing a simple object of prime power dimension. These results will be of central
importance for the proof of Theorem 1.6 and further results of the paper, and are parallel to the
character-theoretic lemmas used in the classical proof of Burnside’s theorem in group theory.

194

P. Etingof et al. / Advances in Mathematics 226 (2011) 176–205

Lemma 7.1. Let X and Y be two simple objects of an integral braided category with coprime
dimensions7 dX , dY . Then one of two possibilities hold:
(i) X and Y projectively centralize each other (i.e. the square of the braiding on X ⊗ Y is a
scalar);
(ii) sX,Y = 0 (where s is the S-matrix).
Proof. It suffices to consider the case when the category is non-degenerate, since any braided
category can be embedded into a non-degenerate one (its center). In this case, by the Verlinde
s
s
s
and dX,Y
are algebraic integers. Since dX and dY are coprime, dXX,Y
formula, dX,Y
dY is also an
X
Y
sX,Y
algebraic integer. Since sX,Y is a sum of dX dY roots of unity, we see that dX dY is either a root of
unity (in which case the square of the braiding must be a scalar, option (i)), or 0 (option (ii)). ✷
Corollary 7.2. Let E be an integral non-degenerate braided category which contains a simple
object X with dimension dX = p r , r > 0, where p is a prime. Then E contains a nontrivial
symmetric subcategory.
Proof. We first show that E contains a nontrivial proper subcategory. Assume not. Take any
simple Y = 1 with dY coprime to dX . We claim that sX,Y = 0. Indeed, otherwise X and Y projectively centralize each other, hence Y centralizes X ⊗ X ∗ , so the Müger centralizer of the category
generated by Y is nontrivial, and we get a nontrivial proper subcategory, a contradiction.
Now let us use the orthogonality of columns (sX,Y ) and (dY ) of the S-matrix:

Y ∈Irr E

sX,Y
dY = 0.
dX

As we have shown, all the nonzero summands in this sum, except the one for Y = 1, come from
objects Y of dimension divisible by p. Therefore, all the summands in this sum except for the
one for Y = 1 (which equals 1) are divisible by p. This is a contradiction.
Now we prove the corollary by induction in FPdim(E). Let D be a nontrivial proper subcategory of E. If D is degenerate, then its Müger center is a nontrivial proper symmetric subcategory
of E, so we are done. Otherwise, D is non-degenerate, and by Theorem 2.4, E = D D . Thus
X = X1 ⊗ X2 , where X1 ∈ D, X2 ∈ D are simple. Since the dimension of X1 or X2 is a positive power of p, we get the desired statement from the induction assumption applied to D or D
(which are non-degenerate braided categories of smaller dimension). ✷
Remark 7.3. The proof above shows that for a simple object X of an integral non-degenerate
braided category E with prime power dimension we can find another nontrivial simple object
Y such that X and Y projectively centralize each other. This can be used to give a proof of
Burnside’s theorem that a finite group G with a conjugacy class C of prime power size cannot be
simple (together with Sylow theorem this implies immediately the solvability of groups of order
p a q b ) as follows. Assume that G is simple (it is also non-abelian since it contains conjugacy class
C of size > 1). Then G is generated by any of its nontrivial conjugacy classes and Rep(G) has no
nontrivial fusion subcategories. This implies that the category Z(Rep(G)) has a unique proper
7 Here and below, we use shortened notation d for the Frobenius–Perron dimension FPdim(X).
X

P. Etingof et al. / Advances in Mathematics 226 (2011) 176–205

195

fusion subcategory, namely Rep(G) (we recall that the category Z(Rep(G)) is identified with the
category of sheaves on G which are G-equivariant with respect to the adjoint action). Now let
X be the simple object of Z(Rep(G)) which corresponds to a trivial sheaf supported on C; then
dX = |C| is a prime power, hence X projectively centralizes some nontrivial object Y . The object
Y is not invertible since the group G is simple non-abelian; hence X generates a nontrivial fusion
subcategory of Z(Rep(G)) contained in Müger centralizer of Y ⊗ Y ∗ . This is a contradiction
since X is not contained in Rep(G) ⊂ Z(Rep(G)) (recall that the subcategory Rep(G) consists
of objects supported on the unit element e ∈ G).
Proposition 7.4. Let C be a slightly degenerate integral braided category, which contains a
simple object X of dimension p r for some prime p > 2. Then C contains a nontrivial Tannakian
subcategory.
Proof. The proof is by induction on the dimension of C. Let B be the category spanned by the
invertible objects of C. Then the Müger center of B contains the category SuperVec.
If the Müger center of B is bigger than SuperVec, then it contains a nontrivial Tannakian
subcategory, and we are done. Otherwise, by Proposition 2.6(ii), B = SuperVec B0 , where B0
is a pointed non-degenerate braided category. If B0 is nontrivial, then C = B0 B0 , and B0 is
slightly degenerate, so we are done by the induction assumption. Thus, it suffices to consider the
case B = SuperVec, which we do from now on.
Let 1 and χ be the simple objects of SuperVec ⊂ C (which are the only invertible objects
of C). Let Y be a non-invertible simple object of C of dimension not divisible by p.
Assume that X and Y projectively centralize each other. In this case the category generated
by Y and χ centralizes X ⊗ X ∗ , so it is a proper subcategory of C. If it is not slightly degenerate,
its Müger center contains more than two simple objects, hence contains a nontrivial Tannakian
subcategory. So we may assume that this subcategory is slightly degenerate, in which case we
are done by the induction assumption.
Thus, we may assume that X and Y do not projectively centralize each other. In this case
Lemma 7.1 tells us that sX,Y = 0.
Now, since C is slightly degenerate, by Corollary 2.7, we have

Y

sX,Y
dY = 0,
dX

and all the nonzero terms in this sum correspond to either dim Y = 1 (there are two such terms,
both equal to 1), or dim Y divisible by p, which gives terms divisible by p. So we get that 2 is
divisible by p, a contradiction. ✷
8. Proof of Theorem 1.6
We are going to prove the following theorem, which will easily imply Theorem 1.6.
Theorem 8.1. Let E be an integral non-degenerate braided category of dimension p a q b , where
p < q are primes, and a, b nonnegative integers. If E is not pointed, then it contains a Tannakian
subcategory of the form Rep(G), where G is a cyclic group of prime order.

196

P. Etingof et al. / Advances in Mathematics 226 (2011) 176–205

Let us explain how Theorem 8.1 implies Theorem 1.6. Let C be a fusion category of dimension
p r q s , where p < q are primes, and r, s 0 are nonnegative integers. We prove that C is solvable
by induction in r + s. We can assume that C is integral, because if not, then C is Z/2Z-graded,
so we are done by the induction assumption. Also, we can clearly assume that C is not pointed.
Clearly, the center E := Z(C) is not pointed. So the result follows by using Theorem 8.1 and
Proposition 4.4.
The rest of the section is devoted to the proof of Theorem 8.1.
Proposition 8.2. Let E be an integral non-degenerate braided category of dimension p a q b ,
a + b > 0. Then E contains a nontrivial invertible object.
Proof. By [14] a fusion category of a prime power Frobenius–Perron dimension is nilpotent
and hence contains a nontrivial invertible object. So we may assume that a, b > 0. Assume the
contrary, i.e. that E does not contain nontrivial invertible objects. By Theorem 2.11, the squared
dimensions of simple objects of E divide p a q b . Therefore, E must contain a simple object of
dimension p r , r > 0. Hence by Corollary 7.2, it contains a nontrivial symmetric subcategory D.
By Theorem 2.1 D is super-Tannakian, and therefore by the usual Burnside’s theorem for finite groups (saying that a group of order p a q b is solvable), it must contain nontrivial invertible
objects, which is a contradiction. ✷
Consider now the subcategory B spanned by all invertible objects of E. Proposition 8.2 implies
that this subcategory is nontrivial. If B is non-degenerate, then by Theorem 2.4, E = B B ,
where B is another non-degenerate braided category, which is nontrivial (as E is not pointed),
but has no nontrivial invertible objects. Thus, by Proposition 8.2, this case is impossible.
Therefore, B is degenerate. Consider the Müger center Z of B. It is a nontrivial pointed
symmetric subcategory in E. So if FPdim(Z) > 2, we are done (as Z necessarily contains a
Tannakian subcategory Rep(G), where G is a cyclic group of prime order).
It remains to consider the case FPdim(Z) = 2. In this case, we must consider the additional
possibility that Z is the symmetric category SuperVec of super vector spaces (in which case
p = 2). In this situation, by Proposition 2.6(ii), B = Z D, where D is non-degenerate, so
if D is nontrivial, by Theorem 2.4 E = D D , where D is another non-degenerate braided
category, whose subcategory of invertible objects is Z. Thus, it is sufficient to consider the
case B = Z = SuperVec. In this case, let C ⊃ Z be the Müger centralizer of Z. This category has dimension is 2a−1 q b > 2, contains only two invertible objects, and its Müger center is
Z = SuperVec, i.e. it is slightly degenerate. Therefore, Theorem 8.1 follows from the following
proposition.
Proposition 8.3. Let C be a slightly degenerate integral braided category of dimension 2r q s > 2,
where q > 2 is a prime, and r, s are nonnegative integers. Suppose that C contains only two
invertible objects. Then C contains a nontrivial Tannakian subcategory.
Proof. It follows from Theorem 2.11 that there exists a non-invertible simple object Y of C
whose dimension is a power of 2. Also, by Corollary 2.8, C contains a simple object X of dimension q m , m > 0. Now the statement follows from Proposition 7.4. ✷

P. Etingof et al. / Advances in Mathematics 226 (2011) 176–205

197

9. Applications
9.1. Fusion categories of dimension pqr
Proposition 9.1. A weakly group-theoretical integral fusion category of square-free dimension is
group-theoretical.
Proof. It follows from [20, Corollary 5.3] that any nilpotent integral fusion category of squarefree dimension is automatically pointed. ✷
Theorem 9.2. Let p < q < r be a triple of distinct primes. Then any integral fusion category C
of dimension pqr is group-theoretical.8
Proof. By Proposition 9.1, it suffices to show that C is Morita equivalent to a nilpotent category,
i.e., is weakly group-theoretical. It suffices to show that the category Z(C) contains a nontrivial
Tannakian subcategory; then the result will follow from Proposition 4.2 and Theorem 1.6.
Lemma 9.3. Z(C) contains a nontrivial symmetric subcategory.
Proof. By Corollary 7.2, if Z(C) contains a simple object of prime power dimension, then it
contains a nontrivial symmetric subcategory and we are done. So it suffices to consider the case
when Z(C) does not contain simple objects of prime power dimension. In this case, by Theorem 2.11, the dimensions of simple objects of Z(C) can be 1, pq, pr, and qr.
Consider first the case when Z(C) contains nontrivial invertible objects. In this case, let B be
the category spanned by the invertible objects of Z(C). If B is degenerate, its Müger center is a
nontrivial symmetric category, and we are done. If B is non-degenerate, then by Theorem 2.4,
Z(C) = B B , where B has no nontrivial invertible objects. It is clear that FPdim(B ) is not
divisible by one of the numbers p 2 , q 2 , r 2 . Say it is p 2 . Then by Theorem 2.11, all nontrivial
simple objects of B have dimension qr, which is a contradiction.
Now consider the remaining case, i.e., when Z(C) has no nontrivial invertible objects. Then
the dimensions of nontrivial simple objects in Z(C) are pq, pr, qr. Let X be a simple object of
Z(C) of dimension qr (it is easy to see that it exists). We have the orthogonality relation

Y ∈Irr Z (C )

sX,Y
dY = 0.
dX

Hence there exists Y0 ∈ Irr Z(C) of dimension pq such that sX,Y0 = 0 (otherwise the left-hand
sX,Y
sX,Y
sX,Y
side will be equal to 1 modulo r). Since dX 0 and dY 0 are algebraic integers, we have that pqr0
is an algebraic integer; thus

sX,Y0
dX

0

is divisible by p. Now we have

Y ∈Irr Z (C )

sX,Y
dX

2

=

FPdim(C)2
= p2 .
2
dX

(9)

8 It is easy to see that any weakly integral but not integral fusion category of dimension pqr is solvable, because in
this case p = 2, and the category has a Z/2Z-grading with trivial component of dimension qr. Such categories are not
hard to classify, but we won’t do it here.

198

P. Etingof et al. / Advances in Mathematics 226 (2011) 176–205

Notice that since sX,Y is a sum of roots of unity, every summand on the left-hand side is a totally positive algebraic integer; the summand corresponding to Y = 1 is 1 and the summand s
corresponding to Y = Y0 is an algebraic integer divisible by p 2 . Thus there exists a Galois automorphism g such that g(s) p 2 . Applying g to both sides of (9), we get a contradiction, as the
left-hand side is 1 + p 2 . ✷
Now let us finish the proof of Theorem 9.2. We are done in the case when pqr is odd since a
symmetric category of odd dimension is automatically Tannakian. So let us assume that p = 2.
Let us prove that Z(C) contains a nontrivial Tannakian subcategory. Assume not. Then a maximal
symmetric subcategory of Z(C) is the category of super vector spaces; let Z ⊂ Z(C) be its Müger
centralizer. Clearly, Z is slightly degenerate, and FPdim(Z) = 2q 2 r 2 .
Assume first that Z has no invertible objects outside of Z = SuperVec. In this case by
Proposition 2.8 Z contains a non-invertible simple object X of odd dimension. We must have
dX = q or r, since if dX = qr then χ ⊗ X = X would also have dimension qr. But Z cannot
contain two simple qr-dimensional objects since then FPdim(Z) 1 + 2q 2 r 2 . Thus we are done
by Proposition 7.4.
Now assume that Z does contain invertible objects outside of Z = SuperVec. In this case,
consider the category B spanned by the invertible objects of Z of odd order. If B is degenerate,
it contains a Tannakian subcategory and we get a contradiction. If B is non-degenerate, then by
Theorem 2.4, Z = B B , and B is a slightly degenerate category of dimension dividing 2q 2 r 2
with no invertible objects outside of SuperVec. By the above argument, either this category must
contain a simple object of dimension q or r, in which case we are done by Proposition 7.4,
ˆ where Bˆ is a 4-dimensional integral nonor B = SuperVec. In the latter case, Z(C) = B B,
degenerate braided category, hence Z(C) is pointed and there is nothing to prove. The theorem
is proved. ✷
Corollary 9.4. Let H be a semisimple Hopf algebra of dimension pqr, where p < q < r are
primes. Then there exists a finite group G of order pqr and an exact factorization G = KL of G
into a product of subgroups, such that H is the split Abelian extension H (G, K, L, 1, 1, 1) =
C[K] Fun(L) associated to this factorization.
Proof. By Theorem 9.2, H is group-theoretical. Thus the result follows from the following
lemma.
Lemma 9.5. Let H be a group-theoretical semisimple Hopf algebra of square-free dimension.
Then H a split Abelian extension of the form H (G, K, L, 1, 1, 1).
Proof. Since H is group theoretical, there exist a group G and a cocycle ω ∈ Z 3 (G, C∗ ) such that
Rep(H ) is the group-theoretical category VecG,ω,K,ψ , of (K, ψ)-biequivariant (G, ω)-graded
vector spaces (here ψ is a 2-cochain on K such that dψ = ω|K ). The fiber functor on Rep(H )
corresponds to a module category M over VecG,ω,K,ψ with one simple object. It is the category
of (G, ω)-graded vector spaces which are left-equivariant under (K, ψ) and right equivariant
under (L, φ), for another subgroup L ⊂ G and 2-cochain φ on L such that dφ = ω|L . The
condition of having one simple object implies that KL = G. Moreover, M is the category of
projective representations of the group K ∩ L with a certain 2-cocycle. But the group K ∩ L has
square free order, so its Sylow subgroups are cyclic, and thus this 2-cocycle must be trivial. So
the one simple object condition implies that K ∩ L = 1, so G = KL is an exact factorization.

P. Etingof et al. / Advances in Mathematics 226 (2011) 176–205

199

Also, since [ω]|K = [ω]|L = 1, we find that ω represents the trivial cohomology class. Finally, if
we choose ω = 1, then ψ and φ are coboundaries, so we can choose ψ = 1, φ = 1.
Thus, we have shown that both the category Rep(H ) and the fiber functor on it attached to H
are the same as those for H (G, K, L, 1, 1, 1). This implies that H = H (G, K, L, 1, 1, 1), as
desired. ✷
9.2. Classification of semisimple Hopf algebras of dimension pq 2
In this section we classify semisimple Hopf algebras of dimension pq 2 , generalizing the results of [18,35,36].
Let p, q be distinct primes.
Proposition 9.6. (See [22].) Every semisimple Hopf algebra H of dimension pq 2 is grouptheoretical.
Proof. By Theorem 1.6 Rep(H ) is either an extension or an equivariantization of a fusion category of smaller dimension.
Suppose Rep(H ) is an extension. Then H contains a central Hopf subalgebra K of prime
dimension, and therefore it is an extension of the form
C → K → H → L → C,
where L is a Hopf algebra with dim L being a product of two primes. If L is cocommutative
then H is a Kac algebra, hence group-theoretical (see [32]). Otherwise, dim L = pq, and L must
be commutative by [11], so the trivial component of Rep(H ) is pointed of dimension pq, hence
Rep(H ) must be pointed.
Suppose now that Rep(H ) is an equivariantization, i.e., Rep(H ) = C G for a cyclic group G of
prime order. By [40, Corollary 3.6] C G is group-theoretical if and only if there is a G-invariant
∗ is pointed. Clearly, such
indecomposable C-module category M such that the dual category CM
a category always exists if C itself is pointed (take M = C). By [13], the only non-pointed possibility for C is the representation category of a non-commutative group algebra of dimension pq.
But this category has a unique (and hence G-invariant) fiber functor. The dual with respect to
this functor is pointed, and so Rep(H ) is group-theoretical. ✷
Corollary 9.7. A semisimple Hopf algebra of dimension pq 2 is either a Kac algebra, or a twisted
group algebra (by a twist corresponding to the subgroup (Z/qZ)2 ), or the dual of a twisted group
algebra.
Proof. The situation is the same as in the proof of Lemma 9.5, except that now the group K ∩ L
does not have to be trivial. The condition on this group is that it must have a non-degenerate
2-cocycle. The only case when this group can be nontrivial is when K = G, L = (Z/qZ)2 , or
L = G, K = (Z/qZ)2 , which implies the statement. ✷
Remark 9.8. There exist integral fusion categories of dimension pq 2 which are not grouptheoretical, e.g., certain Tambara–Yamagami categories [44,14]. By Proposition 9.6 they are not
equivalent to representation categories of semisimple Hopf algebras. A classification of such
categories and another proof of Proposition 9.6 based on this classification will appear in [22].

200

P. Etingof et al. / Advances in Mathematics 226 (2011) 176–205

9.3. Semisimple quasi-Hopf algebras of dimension p r q s
Proposition 9.9. Any semisimple quasi-Hopf (in particular, Hopf) algebra of dimension p r q s > 1
(where p, q are primes) has a nontrivial 1-dimensional representation. Therefore, any semisimple Hopf algebra of dimension p r q s > 1 has a nontrivial group-like element.
Proof. The first statement follows from Theorem 1.6 and Proposition 4.5. The second statement
follows from the first one by taking the dual. ✷
9.4. Simple fusion categories
Definition 9.10. A fusion category is called simple if it has no nontrivial proper fusion subcategories.
Clearly, a pointed fusion category is simple iff it is equivalent to VecG,ω for a cyclic group G
of prime order.
Proposition 9.11. If C is a weakly group-theoretical simple fusion category which is not pointed,
then C = Rep(G), where G is a non-abelian finite simple group.
Proof. Consider the center Z(C). It contains a nontrivial Tannakian subcategory Rep(G) with
|G| FPdim(C) that maps to C. If it maps to Vec, we get a G-grading on C, and we are done.
Otherwise, the image of Rep(G) in C is a nontrivial fusion subcategory. So it must be the whole C,
and by dimension argument the functor Rep(G) → C is an equivalence, so we are done. ✷
9.5. Simple categories of dimension 60
By Theorems 1.6 and 9.2, all weakly integral fusion categories of dimension < 60 are solvable. Thus, the only simple weakly integral fusion categories of dimension < 60 are the categories VecG,ω for cyclic groups G of prime order.
The goal of this subsection is to prove the following result:
Theorem 9.12. Let C be a simple fusion category of dimension 60. Then C ∼
= Rep(A5 ), where A5
is the alternating group of order 60.
Proof. It is clear that the category C is integral, since otherwise it would contain a nontrivial
subcategory Cad , see [14, Proposition 8.27].
Consider first the case when Z(C) is not simple. In this case Z(C) contains a nontrivial subcategory D of dimension 60 (if the dimension of D is > 60, we will replace D with its Müger
centralizer D ).
Let F : Z(C) → C be the forgetful functor. The fusion subcategory F (D) ⊂ C is nontrivial,
since C has no nontrivial gradings. Since C is simple, this means that D has dimension exactly 60
and F : C ∼
= D is an equivalence, so C is a braided category. Clearly, C contains objects of prime
power dimension, since for any representation 60 = 1 + n2i , ni > 1, some ni has to be a prime
power. Thus, C cannot be non-degenerate by Corollary 7.2. Therefore, C must be symmetric, i.e.
C∼
= Rep(G) for a simple group G. Since A5 is the unique simple group of order 60, we obtain
G∼
= A5 .

P. Etingof et al. / Advances in Mathematics 226 (2011) 176–205

201

Now let us assume that Z(C) is simple.
Lemma 9.13. The dimensions of nontrivial simple objects in Z(C) are among the numbers
6, 10, 15, 30.
Proof. Theorem 2.11(i) and Corollary 7.2 show that possible dimensions of nontrivial simple
objects of Z(C) are 6, 10, 12, 15, 20, 30. Thus we just need to exclude the dimensions 60/p,
where p = 3 or 5. In both cases the argument is parallel to the proof of Lemma 9.3. Namely, let
X be a simple object of Z(C) of dimension 60/p. We have the orthogonality relation

Y ∈Irr Z (C )

sX,Y
dY = 0.
dX

Hence there exists Y0 ∈ Irr Z(C) of dimension divisible by p such that sX,Y0 = 0 (otherwise the
sX,Y
sX,Y
left-hand side will be equal to 1 modulo 15/p). Since dX 0 and dY 0 are algebraic integers, we
sX,Y

have that 60 0 is an algebraic integer; thus
word for word as in the proof of Lemma 9.3.

sX,Y0
dX

0

is divisible by p. The rest of the argument is

✷

There is only one decomposition of 60 − 1 = 59 into the sum of numbers 6, 10, 15, 30, namely
59 = 15 + 10 + 10 + 6 + 6 + 6 + 6. It follows that the object I (1) ∈ Z(C) (where I : C → Z(C) is
the induction functor) has precisely 8 simple direct summands, hence dim Hom(I (1), I (1)) 8.
Then [14, Proposition 5.6] implies that the category C contains at least 8 simple objects. Hence C
contains a nontrivial simple object with the square of dimension less or equal to 59
7 < 9; thus this
object is of dimension 2. But it is proved in [38] that an integral simple fusion category cannot
contain a simple object of dimension 2.9 The theorem is proved. ✷
Corollary 9.14. Up to isomorphism, the only semisimple Hopf algebras of dimension 60 without
nontrivial Hopf algebra quotients are the group algebra C[A5 ] and its twisting deformation
C[A5 ]J constructed in [39].
Proof. Let H be such a Hopf algebra. Then Rep(H ) is simple and hence Rep(H ) ∼
= Rep(A5 ) by
Theorem 9.12. Therefore, H is a twisting deformation of C[A5 ]. By [12] twisting deformations
of a group algebra C[G] correspond to non-degenerate 2-cocycles on subgroups of G. Each
Sylow 2-subgroup of A5 admits a unique (up to cohomological equivalence) non-degenerate 2cocycle. All such subgroups are conjugate and so the corresponding twisting deformations are
gauge equivalent and yield the example of [39]. ✷
Remark 9.15. The property of a Hopf algebra having no nontrivial quotients is stronger than that
of having no nontrivial normal Hopf subalgebras. In particular, there exist other semisimple Hopf
algebras of dimension 60 without nontrivial normal Hopf subalgebras. Such are, e.g., C[A5 ]∗J and
the example constructed in [17, 4.2].
9 To be more precise, the argument in [38] is for comodule categories over finite-dimensional cosemisimple Hopf
algebras, but it uses only the Grothendieck ring arguments, and therefore applies verbatim to the case of fusion categories.

202

P. Etingof et al. / Advances in Mathematics 226 (2011) 176–205

9.6. Non-simple fusion categories of dimension 60
Theorem 9.16. Any fusion category C of dimension 60 is weakly group-theoretical.
Proof. If C is simple, then the result follows from the previous subsection. So let us consider the
case when C is not simple. In this case, we may assume that C is integral (otherwise C is Z/2Z
graded, hence solvable).
Let Z(C) be the center of C. It suffices to show that Z(C) contains a nontrivial Tannakian
subcategory.
Lemma 9.17. Z(C) contains a nontrivial symmetric subcategory.
Proof. Recall that in Z(C) we have a standard commutative algebra A = I (1), whose category
of modules is C. We may assume that A does not contain nontrivial invertible objects; otherwise
C is faithfully graded by a nontrivial group, and we are done.
Let D ⊂ C be a nontrivial proper fusion subcategory, of codimension 1 < d < 60 (i.e., dimension 60/d). We claim that there exists an algebra B ⊂ A in Z(C) of dimension d. Indeed,
consider the category E of pairs (X, η), where X is an object of C, and η : ⊗C ,D → ⊗D,C is a
functorial isomorphism satisfying the hexagon relation (where ⊗C ,D , ⊗D,C are the tensor product functors C × D → C, D × C → C). In other words, E is the dual category to C Dop with
respect to the module category C. Thus, we have a diagram of tensor functors Z(C) → E → C,
whose composition is the standard forgetful functor Z(C) → C. Denote the functor Z(C) → E
by F . This functor is surjective, as it is dual to the inclusion C → C Dop . Let F ∨ be the adjoint
functor to F . Then B = F ∨ (1) ⊂ A is the desired subalgebra.
The existence of the algebra B implies that I (1) ∈ Z(C) contains a simple object of prime
power dimension. Indeed, if not, then the dimensions of simple objects can be 1, 6, 10, 12, 15,
20, 30. On the other hand, the dimension of B is some divisor d of 60, 1 < d < 60. Thus, we
have d − 1 = ni , where ni = 6, 10, 12, 15, 20, 30. It is checked by inspection that this is
impossible. ✷
Consider the nontrivial symmetric category contained in Z(C). If its dimension is bigger
than 2, it contains a nontrivial Tannakian subcategory, and we are done. So it remains to consider
the case when the only nontrivial symmetric subcategory of Z(C) is SuperVec. We make this
assumption in the remainder of the section.
Let Z be the Müger centralizer of the subcategory SuperVec. Proposition 2.6(i) implies that if
Z contains a simple object of odd prime power dimension, then it contains a nontrivial Tannakian
subcategory. Let us now consider the case of even prime power dimension.
Lemma 9.18.
(i) If Z contains a 2-dimensional simple object X, then it contains a nontrivial Tannakian subcategory.
(ii) If Z contains a 4-dimensional simple object X, then it contains a nontrivial Tannakian
subcategory.
Proof. (i) Let B be the category spanned by the invertible objects of Z. By Proposition 2.6(ii),
B = SuperVec B0 , where B0 is a non-degenerate pointed category. Then Z = B0 B0 , and B0

P. Etingof et al. / Advances in Mathematics 226 (2011) 176–205

203

contains only two invertible objects, 1 and χ (the generator of SuperVec). Clearly, X ⊗ X ∗ ∈ B0 ,
and χ ⊗ X = X by Proposition 2.6(i), so X ⊗ X ∗ = 1 ⊕ Y , where Y is 3-dimensional. Thus we
are done by Proposition 7.4.
(ii) Arguing as in (i), we see that X ⊗ X ∗ = 1 + · · · , where · · · is a direct sum of simple
objects of Z of dimension > 1. Moreover, at least one of these dimensions must be odd, since
the total is 15. If there is an object of dimension 3 or 5, then we are done by Proposition 7.4.
Otherwise, 15 is the smallest odd dimension that can occur (by Theorem 2.11), so we must have
X ⊗ X ∗ = 1 ⊕ Y , where Y has dimension 15. Then we would have sXX∗ = λ + 15μ, where λ, μ
are roots of unity. On the other hand, sXX∗ is divisible by dX = 4. Thus λ − μ is divisible by 4.
So λ − μ = 0, and X projectively centralizes its dual, hence itself. Thus Y centralizes itself, so it
generates a symmetric category, which must contain a nontrivial Tannakian subcategory. ✷
Lemma 9.18 shows that it suffices to prove that Z contains a simple object of prime power
dimension; then we will be done by Proposition 7.4.
To show this, let A+ ⊂ A be χ ⊗ K, where K is the kernel of c2 − 1 (squared braiding minus
one) on χ ⊗ A. Then A+ is a subalgebra of A contained in Z, and by the argument at the end of
the proof of Lemma 9.17, A+ contains a simple object of prime power dimension. The theorem
is proved. ✷
10. Relation with previous results on classification of semisimple Hopf algebras and fusion
categories
1. Theorem 1.6 for s = 0, i.e. for fusion categories of prime power dimension, follows from
[14], where it is shown that any such category is cyclically nilpotent. For r = s = 1 (i.e. for fusion
categories of dimension pq), Theorem 1.6 follows from the paper [13], where such categories are
classified (we note that the main results of [11] and [13] are trivial consequences of Theorem 1.6).
2. Semisimple Hopf algebras of small dimension were studied extensively in the literature,
see [33, Table 1] for the list of references. In particular, in the monograph [33] it is shown that
semisimple Hopf algebras of dimension < 60 are either upper or lower semisolvable up to a
cocycle twist, and in [37] it is shown that any semisimple Hopf algebra of dimension < 36 is
group-theoretical (this is not true for dimension 36, see [40]). Our Theorems 1.6 and 9.2 along
with [8] further describe the structure (of representation categories) of such Hopf algebras in
group-theoretical terms.
Numerous classification results and nontrivial examples of Hopf algebras of dimension pq n
are obtained in [25,11,16,18,33–36,21]. Some of these results use an assumption of Hopf algebras involved being of Frobenius type. Our Theorem 1.5 shows that this assumption is always
satisfied.
Semisimple Hopf algebras of dimension pqr we studied in [1,34]. In particular, Hopf algebras
of dimension 30 and 42 were classified as Abelian extensions (Kac algebras). Our Corollary 9.4
is a generalization of these results. It implies that [34, Theorem 4.6] can be used to obtain a
complete classification of such Hopf algebras.
11. Questions
We would like to conclude the paper with two questions.
Question 1. Does there exist a fusion category that does not have the strong Frobenius property?

204

P. Etingof et al. / Advances in Mathematics 226 (2011) 176–205

Question 2. Does there exist a weakly integral fusion category which is not weakly grouptheoretical?
Acknowledgments
We are deeply grateful to V. Drinfeld for many inspiring conversations. Without his influence, this paper would not have been written. We also thank S. Gelaki and D. Naidu for useful
discussions. The work of P.E. was partially supported by the NSF grant DMS-0504847. The
work of D.N. was partially supported by the NSA grant H98230-07-1-0081 and the NSF grant
DMS-0800545. The work of V.O. was partially supported by the NSF grant DMS-0602263.
References
[1] N. Andruskiewitsch, S. Natale, Examples of self-dual Hopf algebras, J. Math. Sci. Univ. Tokyo 6 (1) (1999) 181–
215.
[2] B. Bakalov, A. Kirillov Jr., Lectures on Tensor Categories and Modular Functors, AMS, 2001.
[3] A. Bruguières, Catégories prémodulaires, modularization et invariants des variétés de dimension 3, Math.
Ann. 316 (2) (2000) 215–236.
[4] A. Davydov, M. Müger, D. Nikshych, V. Ostrik, The Witt group of non-degenerate braided fusion categories, in
preparation.
[5] P. Deligne, Catégories tannakiennes, in: The Grothendieck Festschrift, vol. II, in: Progr. Math., vol. 87, Birkhäuser,
Boston, MA, 1990, pp. 111–195.
[6] P. Deligne, Catégories tensorielles, Mosc. Math. J. 2 (2) (2002) 227–248.
[7] J. Donin, A. Mudrov, Dynamical Yang–Baxter equation and quantum vector bundles, Comm. Math. Phys. 254
(2005) 719–760.
[8] V. Drinfeld, S. Gelaki, D. Nikshych, V. Ostrik, Group-theoretical properties of nilpotent modular categories, eprint
arXiv:0704.0195v2 [math.QA].
[9] V. Drinfeld, S. Gelaki, D. Nikshych, V. Ostrik, On braided fusion categories, I, Selecta Math. 16 (1) (2010) 1–119.
[10] P. Etingof, S. Gelaki, Some properties of finite-dimensional semisimple Hopf algebras, Math. Res. Lett. 5 (1998)
191–197.
[11] P. Etingof, S. Gelaki, Semisimple Hopf algebras of dimension pq are trivial, J. Algebra 210 (2) (1998) 664–669.
[12] P. Etingof, S. Gelaki, The classification of triangular semisimple and cosemisimple Hopf algebras over an algebraically closed field, Int. Math. Res. Not. IMRN (5) (2000) 223–234.
[13] P. Etingof, S. Gelaki, V. Ostrik, Classification of fusion categories of dimension pq, Int. Math. Res. Not. IMRN
(57) (2004) 3041–3056.
[14] P. Etingof, D. Nikshych, V. Ostrik, On fusion categories, Ann. of Math. 162 (2005) 581–642.
[15] P. Etingof, V. Ostrik, Finite tensor categories, Mosc. Math. J. 4 (2004) 627–654.
[16] N. Fukuda, Semisimple Hopf algebras of dimension 12, Tsukuba J. Math. 21 (1) (1997) 43–54.
[17] C. Galindo, S. Natale, Simple Hopf algebras and deformations of finite groups, Math. Res. Lett. 14 (6) (2007)
943–954.
[18] S. Gelaki, Quantum groups of dimension pq 2 , Israel J. Math. 102 (1997) 227–267.
[19] S. Gelaki, D. Naidu, D. Nikshych, Centers of graded fusion categories, eprint arXiv:0905.3117 [math.QA].
[20] S. Gelaki, D. Nikshych, Nilpotent fusion categories, Adv. Math. 217 (2008) 1053–1071.
[21] M. Izumi, H. Kosaki, Kac algebras arising from composition of subfactors: general theory and classification, Mem.
Amer. Math. Soc. 158 (750) (2002).
[22] D. Jordan, E. Larson, On the classification of certain fusion categories, eprint arXiv:0812.1603v2 [math.QA].
[23] A. Kirillov Jr., Modular categories and orbifold models, II, arXiv:math/0110221.
[24] L. Kong, I. Runkel, Cardy algebras and sewing constraints, I, arXiv:0807.3356.
[25] A. Masuoka, Some further classification results on semisimple Hopf algebras, Comm. Algebra 24 (1) (1996) 307–
329.
[26] M. Müger, Galois theory for braided tensor categories and the modular closure, Adv. Math. 150 (2) (2000) 151–201.
[27] M. Müger, From subfactors to categories and topology, I. Frobenius algebras in and Morita equivalence of tensor
categories, J. Pure Appl. Algebra 180 (2003) 81–157.

P. Etingof et al. / Advances in Mathematics 226 (2011) 176–205

205

[28] M. Müger, Galois extensions of braided tensor categories and braided crossed G-categories, J. Algebra 277 (2004)
256–281.
[29] M. Müger, On the structure of modular categories, Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. (3) 87 (2) (2003) 291–308.
[30] S. Montgomery, S. Witherspoon, Irreducible representations of crossed products, J. Pure Appl. Algebra 129 (3)
(1998) 315–326.
[31] D. Naidu, D. Nikshych, Lagrangian subcategories and braided tensor equivalences of twisted quantum doubles of
finite groups, Comm. Math. Phys. 279 (2008) 845–872.
[32] S. Natale, On group theoretical Hopf algebras and exact factorizations of finite groups, J. Algebra 270 (1) (2003)
199–211.
[33] S. Natale, Semisolvability of semisimple Hopf algebras of low dimension, Mem. Amer. Math. Soc. 186 (874)
(2007).
[34] S. Natale, On semisimple Hopf algebras of dimension pq 2 , J. Algebra 221 (1) (1999) 242–278.
[35] S. Natale, On semisimple Hopf algebras of dimension pq 2 , II, Algebr. Represent. Theory 4 (3) (2001).
[36] S. Natale, On semisimple Hopf algebras of dimension pq r , Algebr. Represent. Theory 7 (2) (2004) 173–188.
[37] S. Natale, Hopf algebra extensions of group algebras and Tambara–Yamagami categories, arXiv:0805.3172.
[38] W. Nichols, M. Richmond, The Grothendieck group of a Hopf algebra, J. Pure Appl. Algebra 106 (3) (1996) 297–
306.
[39] D. Nikshych, K0 -rings and twisting of finite dimensional semisimple Hopf algebras, Comm. Algebra 26 (1998)
321–342.
[40] D. Nikshych, Non group-theoretical semisimple Hopf algebras from group actions on fusion categories, Selecta
Math. (N.S.) 14 (2008) 145–161.
[41] V. Ostrik, Module categories, weak Hopf algebras and modular invariants, Transform. Groups 8 (2003) 177–206.
[42] V. Ostrik, Module categories over the Drinfeld double of a finite group, Int. Math. Res. Not. IMRN (27) (2003)
1507–1520.
[43] D. Tambara, Invariants and semi-direct products for finite group actions on tensor categories, J. Math. Soc.
Japan 53 (2) (2001) 429–456.
[44] D. Tambara, S. Yamagami, Tensor categories with fusion rules of self-duality for finite abelian groups, J. Algebra 209 (2) (1998) 692–707.

