John Philip Tarburton, J Diabetes Metab 2015, 6:8
http://dx.doi.org/10.4172/2155-6156.C1.030

International Conference on

Targeting Diabetes and Novel Therapeutics

September 14-16, 2015 Las Vegas, Nevada, USA

Acquired methemoglobinemia in diabetic blood exposed to organic nitrites and organic nitrates
John Philip Tarburton
National University, USA

A

cquired methemoglobinemia in diabetics’ blood may be attributed to the intake of toxins and medications. Specifically organic
nitrites such as butyl nitrite and amyl nitrite have been implicated in methemoglobin formation in diabetic patients, given these
drugs while organic nitrates such as nitroglycerin and isosorbide nitrates have been implicated in methemoglobin formation in
diabetic coronary heart disease patients using these nitrates. While these organic nitrates and organic nitrites pose a risk to the general
community of causing methemoglobin in both diabetic and non-diabetic alike, recent in vitro oxidation studies of diabetic blood
samples by organic nitrites have clearly indicated their blood to be more susceptible to oxidation than non diabetics blood (n=20 and
P<0.05). The results for organic nitrates however did not show these findings. Specifically, diabetics blood treated with nitroglycerin
was oxidized at a rate similar to that of non-diabetics (n=15 and P>0.05). Isosorbide mononitrate and isosorbide dinitrate treatment
of diabetic blood samples and non-diabetic blood samples revealed no discernable oxidation of hemoglobin into methemoglobin for
either group. These studies then revealed that the diabetic population is at a greater relative risk of getting methemoglobinemia from
organic nitrites than organic nitrates.
Biography
John Philip Tarburton completed his PhD from the University of Nebraska and also did Postdoctoral studies at the University of Nebraska. He is an Assistant Professor at
National University, USA. He has published more than 30 papers and abstracts in reputed journals and a book chapter about his research findings.
jtarburton@nu.edu

Notes:

J Diabetes Metab 2015
ISSN: 2155-6156 JDM, an open access journal

Diabetic Medications 2015

Volume 6, Issue 8

September 14-16, 2015

Page 32

