Physical Chemistry & Biophysics
Editorial

Bhattacharyya, J Phys Chem Biophys 2015, 5:4
http://dx.doi.org/10.4172/2161-0398.1000e128

OpenAccess
Access
Open

Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy: Applications in Medicine
Shalmoli Bhattacharyya*
Department of Biophysics, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, India

Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) is rapidly
gaining ground in modern clinical research. This technique is
useful for understanding a wide variety of applications ranging
from characterization and quality control of various compounds
to biomedicine. Importantly, biological materials like proteins,
carbohydrates, lipids and nucleic acids have unique structures so it is
possible to obtain spectral fingerprints corresponding to their functional
groups. FTIR spectroscopic techniques generate an immediate appeal in
the field of biology and medicine because of their fast and non-invasive
nature. It allows easy visualization of cellular components based on
their intrinsic properties and chemical composition. It provides a
potential route to screen diagnostic markers for diseases like cancer.
FTIR spectroscopy is also considered as a useful tool for analysis of
the chemical composition of human calculi. Analysis of stone samples
from recurrent stone formers by FTIR may provide a clue to effective
prevention of stone recurrence [1].
Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy has proven to be
a fundamental and valuable technique in biology and medicine due
to its high sensitivity to detecting changes in the functional groups
belonging to tissue components such as lipids, proteins and nucleic
acids [2]. Infrared spectra of human and animal tissues could provide
information on the molecular structure of tissues. FT-IR has been
extensively applied for the determination of a biochemical metabolite
in biological fluids. Diagnosis of various types of malignancies such as
lung, breast, skin, cervical and colon cancers is already reported in the
literature. The spectra are analysed for changes in levels of molecules
such as RNA, DNA, phosphates, and carbohydrates. Variation of
the RNA/DNA ratio as measured at 1121/1020 cm-1 generally show
higher ratio for malignant tissues compared to their non-malignant
counterpart. Changes in the spectra of malignant samples were also
observed in the symmetric and asymmetric stretching bands of the
phosphodiester backbones of nucleic acids, the CH stretching region,
the C-O stretching bands of the C-OH groups of carbohydrates and
cellular protein residuals, and the pressure dependence of the CH2
stretching mode [3]. The changes in the FTIR spectra correlate to
modification of bases and sugars, and redistribution of the H-bond
network. The loss/change in the covalent bonds due to damage in
the primary, secondary and tertiary structure of nucleic acids can

be observed in the spectra. These changes involved the phosphate
and C-O stretching bands, the CH stretch region, and the pressure
dependence of the CH2 bending and C=O stretching modes. FTIR
micro spectroscopy has also been used as a fast diagnostic technique
to identify drugs targeting specific molecular pathways causing chronic
myeloid leukaemia. Chemometric data analysis was used to assess drug
compounds in ex vivo cancer cells [4].
Substantial progress has been made in incorporating advances in
computational methods into the system to increase the sensitivity of
the entire setup, making it an objective and sensitive technique suitable
for automation to suit the demands of the medical community.
FTIR spectroscopy provides the possibility of obtaining information
on molecular composition and structure at the level of single cell within
a time-scale of few seconds-minutes and to perform qualitative and
quantitative multi-component analyses. It helps in automated pattern
recognition and objective classifications of samples with minimal
and label-free sample treatment. The technical improvements will
progressively increase the number of potential applications of micro
FT-IR to cancer research and clinical diagnosis. It may be hoped that
the future pre-clinical and clinical trials will include sample evaluation
utilizing this technique in order to obtain data necessary to validate
the use of micro FT-IR spectroscopy in a clinical context. In fact,
this appears to be the most important way to reduce the high level of
skepticism of many biologists and pathologists about an old technology
that has been designed and improved mainly for applications in clinical
diagnosis including cancer research.
References
1.	 Bhattacharyya S, Sharma G, Mandal AK, Singh SK (2014) Analysis of the
chemical composition of urinary calculi using Fourier Transform Infrared
Spectroscopy: A preliminary study. J Postgrad Med Edu Res 48: 128-131.
2.	 Dritsa V (2012) FTIR Spectroscopy in Medicine, National Technical University
of Athens, NTUA Greece.
3.	 Wang HP, Wang HC, Huang YJ (1997) Microscopic FTIR studies of lung
cancer cells in pleural ﬂuid. Science of the Total Environment 204: 283-287.
4.	 Bellisola G, Peruta DM, Vezzalini M, Moratti E, Vaccari L, et al. (2010) Tracking
infrared signatures of drugs in cancer cells by Fourier transform IR micro
spectroscopy. Analyst 135: 3077-3086.

*Corresponding author: Shalmoli Bhattacharyya, Room No. 518, Fifth Floor,
Research Block-B, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and
Research, Chandigarh 160 012, India, E-mail: shalmoli2007@yahoo.co.in
Received July 23, 2015; Accepted July 27, 2015; Published July 30, 2015
Citation: Bhattacharyya S (2015) Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy:
Applications in Medicine. J Phys Chem Biophys 5: e128. doi:10.4172/21610398.1000e128
Copyright: © 2015 Bhattacharyya S. This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the
original author and source are credited.

J Phys Chem Biophys
ISSN: 2161-0398 JPCB, an open access journal

Volume 5 • Issue 4 • 1000e126

