Expert Systems with Applications 37 (2010) 4772–4778

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Expert Systems with Applications
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/eswa

Use of social network information to enhance collaborative ﬁltering performance
Fengkun Liu a, Hong Joo Lee b,*
a
b

Department of Management & Information Systems, College of Business Administration, Kent State University, Kent, Ohio 44242, USA
Department of Business Administration, The Catholic University of Korea, Yeokgokhoejuro 63, Wonmi, Bucheon, Gyeonggi, 420-836, Republic of Korea

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Keywords:
Information ﬁltering
Personalization
Social network information

a b s t r a c t
When people make decisions, they usually rely on recommendations from friends and acquaintances.
Although collaborative ﬁltering (CF), the most popular recommendation technique, utilizes similar neighbors to generate recommendations, it does not distinguish friends in a neighborhood from strangers who
have similar tastes. Because social networking Web sites now make it easy to gather social network information, a study about the use of social network information in making recommendations will probably
produce productive results.
In this study, we developed a way to increase recommendation effectiveness by incorporating social
network information into CF. We collected data about users’ preference ratings and their social network
relationships from a social networking Web site. Then, we evaluated CF performance with diverse neighbor groups combining groups of friends and nearest neighbors. Our results indicated that more accurate
prediction algorithms can be produced by incorporating social network information into CF.
Ó 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
When Internet surfers search for information, they rely on recommendations from other people, customer reviews, or recommender systems (Ansari, Essegaier, & Kohli, 2000; Resnick &
Varian, 1997; Shardanand & Maes, 1995; Sinha & Swearingen,
2001). Recently, various kinds of recommender systems have attempted to reduce information overload and retain customers by
providing personalized recommendations based on preferences.
These recommender systems use diversiﬁed algorithms to ﬁlter
data and generate recommendations about items such as books,
news, music, Web pages, and even virtual items (Cho, Kim, &
Kim, 2002; Kim, Kim, & Cho, 2006; Kim, Lee, Cho, & Kim, 2004;
Lee & Park, 2007). Among those various recommender systems,
collaborative ﬁltering (CF) has become the most popular recommendation algorithm (Herlocker, Konstan, Terveen, & Riedl,
2004). This system predicts user preferences based on the opinions
of other similar users who have rated the items according to preference (Herlocker et al., 2004; Resnick, Iacovou, Suchak, Bergstrom,
& Riedl, 1994). By calculating the level of similarity between users
in a rating data set, it becomes possible to ﬁnd the nearest neighbors with the highest similarity values among all users. Once a
user’s neighborhood is identiﬁed, particular items can be evaluated
by forming a weighted summation of neighbors’ opinions (Herlocker et al., 2004). This is the generic CF procedure.
* Corresponding author. Tel./fax: +82 2 2164 4009.
E-mail address: hongjoo@catholic.ac.kr (H.J. Lee).
0957-4174/$ - see front matter Ó 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2009.12.061

One drawback of CF is that it is unable to distinguish neighbors
as friends or strangers with similar taste; while it utilizes neighbors to generate recommendations, it is currently unable to reﬂect
how people seek information using their social networks. Sinha
and Swearingen (2001) compared the quality of recommendations
made by recommender systems and by users’ friends. They found
that users preferred recommendations from friends to recommendations made by recommender systems such as Amazon.com.
In the early days of the Internet, identifying the close friends of
a user was difﬁcult. Now, social networking Web sites such as
Facebook, MySpace, and Cyworld make gathering social network
information easy, allowing one to combine social network information and CF when generating recommendations. Therefore, a study
about how to utilize social network information in making recommendations should yield valuable information.
In this study, we developed a way to increase recommendation
effectiveness by combining social network information and CF
methods. First, we collected data about users’ preference ratings
and their social network relationships from a social networking
Web site. Next, we developed approaches for selecting neighbors
and amplifying friends’ data. Finally, we generated recommendations about items using CF and the suggested neighbor groups,
and compared the performances of diverse algorithms in terms
of the mean absolute error (MAE).
Section 2 summarizes related studies about recommender systems and social networks. Section 3 sets out the procedures used
for data collection and proﬁle building. Section 4 introduces the diverse experiments that have incorporated collaborative ﬁltering

F. Liu, H.J. Lee / Expert Systems with Applications 37 (2010) 4772–4778

and social networks. Section 5 presents the experimental results,
and Section 6 discusses the ﬁndings and presents our conclusions.
2. Social networks and collaborative ﬁltering
2.1. Recommender systems
A recommender system is one that provides content or information about products users may like (Iijima & Ho, 2007; Resnick &
Varian, 1997; Sinha & Swearingen, 2001). Many recommender systems and commercial Web sites now provide personalized recommendations, including Amazon, idiomag,1 Last.fm,2 Netﬂix,
Pandora.3 Recommender systems can beneﬁt both customers and
businesses. They can reduce search time and cost when customers
seek out information or items online and may provide unexpected
goods (Haubl & Murray, 2006; Haubl & Trifts, 2000; Pennock, Horvitz, & Giles, 2000; Sinha & Swearingen, 2001; Tam & Ho, 2006); they
can also make online businesses’ commercial systems easier to use
and increase the possibility of cross-selling, thereby helping businesses retain customers and increase revenue.
Of the several categories of recommender systems, we focused
on CF algorithms because they can easily incorporate social network information. CF-based recommender systems provide recommendations to consumers about items that people with similar
tastes and preferences have liked in the past. Many algorithms
use different approaches to ﬁlter information. The most common
approach is to ﬁnd the nearest neighborhood by calculating Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcients between users (Adomavicius & Tuzhilin, 2005; Herlocker et al., 2004). By ﬁnding the top N nearest
neighbors with similar interests, predictive recommendations can
be calculated using the following algorithms.

v i ¼

1 X
v i;j
jIi j j2I

ð1Þ

i

Eq. (1) calculates the mean value of ratings of user i (Breese, Heckerman, & Kadie, 1998), where v i;j is the voting of user i on item j and
Ii is the set of items.

P
ðv a;j À v a Þðv i;j À v i Þ
q
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
xða; iÞ ¼ P j
P
 2 j ðv i;j À v i Þ2
j ðv a;j À v a Þ

ð2Þ

Eq. (2) calculates Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcients (Breese et al.,
1998). The top N nearest neighbors can be obtained by sorting the
Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcients.
The ﬁnal step in CF is predicting a customer’s product preferences. The predicted preference score, P ij , of user i on item j can
be calculated by taking the weighted average of all the ratings
for item j with user i’s average rating score on other items (Eq.
(3)). Raters refers to the set of users who rated item j.

Pij ¼ v i þ

P

P

À

v a;j À v a

Á

wða;iÞ
jw
j
ð
a;i
Þ
a2Raters

a2Raters

ð3Þ

2.2. Social networks and collaborative ﬁltering
Granovetter (1973) argued that people generally use social networks to obtain information. Dissemination of information and
recommendations generally take place within an informal community of collaborators, colleagues, or friends (Granovetter, 1973;
Kautz, Selman, & Shah, 1997). Existing social networks permit serendipitous connections and social referrals (Kautz et al., 1997), and
1
2
3

http://www.idiomag.com.
http://www.last.fm.
http://www.pandora.com.

4773

thereby offer many opportunities for recommendations. CF algorithms are based on everyday life, in which we rely on recommendations from other people (Resnick & Varian, 1997).
Therefore, prediction methodologies that incorporate social
network information may be more accurate than those based on
mere mathematical algorithms. Some studies have already used
social networks for making recommendations and enhancing the
performance of recommender systems (Golbeck, 2006; Kautz
et al., 1997; Liu & Maes, 2005; Ryu, Kim, Cho, & Kim, 2006).
Social networks have been utilized for making recommendations
in diverse application domains such as movies (Golbeck, 2006), Web
pages (Kautz et al., 1997), and a broad range of other interests (Liu &
Maes, 2005). Kautz et al. (1997) investigated existing social networks by mining public documents found on the Internet for data
and then generated recommendations via chains of named experts
in these social networks. Liu and Maes (2005) gathered interests
and passions from free-form natural language in Web-based social
networks and developed ‘‘InterestMap,” a system based on co-occurring keywords used to describe interests and identities, to recommend items by spreading activation over the networks.
Other studies have incorporated social network elements into
traditional CF systems (Avesani, Massa, & Tiella, 2005; Massa &
Avesani, 2007; Ryu et al., 2006). Ryu et al. (2006) identiﬁed the
nearest neighbors of a user based on Pearson’s correlations. Ryu
et al. (2006) considered this to be a form of social network; they
expanded this network by connecting neighbors’ neighbors. This
expanded network, based on Pearson’s correlations, can generate
recommendations efﬁciently with a similar level of recommendation quality. Golbeck (2006) studied the utility of trust level in social networks. They obtained subjective trust values about a
particular user from each rater, and then selected only raters with
the highest trust values. Ziegler and Lausen (2004) found a positive
correlation between trust and interest similarity by comparing
user similarity between trusted peers and all peers in a book reader
community (Ziegler & Lausen, 2004). Users can express their trust
of other users on community Web sites such as product review
sites, and the level of expressed trust can be a good predictor of
user preference. Avesani et al. (2005) and Massa and Avesani
(2007) utilized trust expressions on a ski mountaineering site
and epinions.com, respectively, to predict user preferences based
on propagated trust metrics. The performance of these trust-aware
recommendations was better than those using traditional CF. Thus,
recommendations based on trust are possible in situations when
users express their trust of other users.
In this study, we developed diverse approaches to selecting
neighbors based on a user’s social network information to enhance
recommendation accuracy, and compared the performance of the
proposed methods. We began by collecting users’ social network
information and preference data from a social networking Web site
through a Web-based survey.
3. Data collection
We distributed a survey to users of Cyworld, a social networking Web site, to obtain data about their preferences and their social
network. Cyworld was launched in 1999 as a personal contact Web
site with photo sharing and blogging, and is currently the most
popular social networking Web site in South Korea(Schonfeld,
2006). Users of Cyworld connect to their immediate circle of
friends by adding them as ‘‘ilchon” (close friends). Cyworld currently has 18 million members and has launched Chinese, Japanese, and American versions.4 Fig. 1 is a screen shot of the
4
The URLs for the Korean, Chinese, Japanese, and American Cyworld Web sites are
www.cyworld.com, www.cyworld.com.cn, www.jp.cyworld.com, and www.us.cyworld.com, respectively.

4774

F. Liu, H.J. Lee / Expert Systems with Applications 37 (2010) 4772–4778

Fig. 1. Sample Cyworld mini-home page.

Cyworld mini-home page; it includes personal space for a photo gallery, message board, guestbook, and bulletin board.
Users have the option to decorate their mini-home page and
mini-room by buying from tens of thousands of digital items:
home page skins (wallpapers for their mini-home page, see
Fig. 3), background music, and virtual appliances. Each week, Cyworld users buy thousands of ‘skin items.’ Users pay more to use
the skin items for a longer time; e.g., they pay US$1 to use a skin
for 1 week. Fig. 2 is a screenshot showing thumbnails of skin items
available for purchase.
We conducted a Web survey over a period of 9 weeks from April
1 to June 10, 2007. In total, 30 skin items were presented to survey
participants, who were asked to rate their preferences using a 5point scale with 5 indicating ‘best.’ These skin items were the 30

most popular skin items listed on the Cyworld gift-shop Web page
on March 22, 2007.
Fig. 3 shows part of the survey Web page: the highlighted area
bordered with bold lines shows one of the 30 Cyworld skins.
Respondents use navigation buttons labeled ‘‘Previous” and ‘‘Next”
to switch between skin items. Typically, it took respondents about
10 min to rate all the items.
When selecting participants, we ﬁrst found volunteers from a
Korean university who had more than ten Cyworld friends; this
was the ‘distributor’ group. Distributors had two tasks: participate
in the survey and distribute the survey to their friends. Their
friends, who may have attended the same university or different
universities, also completed the survey after receiving the survey
URL from distributors. All survey participants were Cyworld users.

Fig. 2. Thumbnails of Cyworld skin items for purchase.

F. Liu, H.J. Lee / Expert Systems with Applications 37 (2010) 4772–4778

4775

Fig. 3. A screenshot of the Web survey.

Participants included 42 distributors, each of whom had at least
one friend complete the survey. Of the distributors, we selected 27
who had more than ten friends complete the survey; this was classiﬁed as the ﬁnal distributor set. Distributors had a total of 313
friends; the maximum number of friends was 27, and the number
of friends averaged 11.59. Subjects also included 119 users who
had no relationship as a friend with any distributor. Subjects ranged in age from 13 to 38 years and averaged 24.64 years. Subjects
had been using Cyworld for an average of 3.64 years, but the largest fraction of subjects had been using it for more than 4 years.

number of predictions, pi is the predicted rating for item i, and r i
is the actual rating for item i. Lower MAE values indicate more
accurate predictions

4. Hybrid approaches

1. From the data set of all distributors (A, refer to Fig. 5), randomly
select 30% of each distributor’s ratings and set the value of those
ratings to ‘‘Null.” This transformed set (A-TR) is merged with
other users’ preference data (B) as the training set. The selected
30% of each distributor’s ratings are the test set (A-TE).
2. For each distributor, calculate Pearson’s correlations between
the distributor and users in the training set formed in step 1.
3. For each distributor, obtain the Top 30 nearest neighbors by
sorting the Pearson’s correlations calculated in step 2.
4. By using the prediction algorithm (Eq. (3)), predict the ratings of
the particular distributor in the test set with the neighbors
obtained in step 3.
5. Repeat steps 2–4 until all distributors’ ratings in the test set are
predicted.
6. By comparing the predicted value and the real value of the ratings, calculate the MAE.
7. Repeat the above steps 30 times and calculate the average MAE
of this experiment.

Simply replacing the nearest neighbors with a social network
group is easy, but this method is probably less effective than traditional CF because the set of social network members is much smaller. We conducted experiments using this method to compare the
outcome with other algorithms. Next, we introduced new algorithms that could simultaneously handle nearest neighbors and social network members. For example, if social network members are
also in the nearest neighbor set, then the members’ preference can
be emphasized, while leaving other nonsocial network members’
preference weights unchanged.
We performed four experiments. For the ﬁrst experiment, we
generated predictive recommendations through CF using nearest
neighbors. For the second experiment, we utilized friends instead
of nearest neighbors to make predictions. For the third experiment,
we combined nearest neighbors and friends into a new neighbor
group. In the fourth experiment, we devised another hybrid approach incorporating levels of interaction to emphasize the inﬂuence of friends among neighbors. Fig. 4 presents a brief overview
of the differences among the four experiments.
We assessed the differences in prediction accuracy among the
four methods by comparing MAE values; the MAE between ratings
and predictions is a widely used metric in recommender systems
(Herlocker et al., 2004). In the following equation, N is the total

PN
MAE ¼

i¼1 jpi

À ri j

N

ð4Þ

4.1. Experiment 1: CF with nearest neighbors (traditional)
This experiment used the following methodology:

4.2. Experiment 2: CF with friends (Social)
This experiment used the following methodology:
1. Same as step 1 from Experiment 1.

4776

F. Liu, H.J. Lee / Expert Systems with Applications 37 (2010) 4772–4778

Fig. 4. Overview of the four experiments.

Fig. 5. Training and test set.

2. For each distributor, calculate Pearson’s correlations between
the distributor and the distributor’s friends in the training set
formed in step 1.
3. By using the prediction algorithm (Eq. (3)), predict the ratings of
the particular distributor in the test set with friends’ preference
data and Pearson’s correlations obtained in step 2.
4. Repeat steps 2–4 until all distributors’ ratings in the test set are
predicted.
5. By comparing the predicted value and the real value of the ratings, calculate the MAE.
6. Repeat the above steps 30 times and calculate the average MAE
of this experiment.

4.3. Experiment 3: CF with nearest neighbors
and friends (combined)
This experiment used the following methodology:
1. Select a distributor whose ratings will be predicted.
2. Insert preference data of non-friends of the distributor to the
training set.
3. Randomly select 30% of the distributor’s ratings and set the
value of those ratings to ‘‘Null.” This transformed set is merged
with the training set as new training set. The selected 30% of the
distributor’s ratings are the test set.

4777

F. Liu, H.J. Lee / Expert Systems with Applications 37 (2010) 4772–4778

4. Calculate Pearson’s correlations between the distributor and
users in the training set formed in step 3.
5. Find the Top M nearest neighbors by sorting Pearson’s correlations, where M = 30 – the number of friends, and merge the
friends of the distributor with the nearest neighbor group to a
new neighbor group.
6. By using the prediction algorithm (Eq. (3)), predict the ratings of
the particular distributor in the test set with the neighbor group
selected in step 5.
7. Repeat the above steps until all distributors’ ratings in the test
set are predicted.
8. By comparing the predicted value and the real value of the ratings, calculate the MAE.
9. Repeat the above steps 30 times and calculate the average MAE
of this experiment.

Fig. 6. Performance of each experiment.

Table 1
Normality test results.

4.4. Experiment 4: CF with nearest neighbors and amplifying friends’
preferences (ampliﬁed)
This experiment used the following methodology:
1. Same as step 1 from Experiment 1.
2. For each distributor, calculate Pearson’s correlations between
the distributor and users in the training set formed in step 1.
3. For each distributor, obtain the Top 30 nearest neighbors by
sorting the Pearson’s correlations calculated in step 2.
4. If friends of the distributor are in the Top 30 neighbors, amplify
the preference data of the friends (the ampliﬁcation method
used in this study is explained after the description of Experiment 4).
5. By using the prediction algorithm (Eq. (3)), predict the ratings of
the particular distributor in the test set with the neighbors
obtained in steps 3 and 4.
6. Repeat steps 2–5 until all distributors’ ratings in the test set are
predicted.
7. By comparing the predicted value and the real value of the ratings, calculate the MAE.
8. Repeat the above steps 30 times and calculate the average MAE
of this experiment.
The closeness and similarity of two individuals in a social networking Web site can be measured by the frequency of interactions between them. We can use the term ‘level of interaction’ as
a factor in calculating prediction values. By counting the total number of messages a friend has left for the user during the past year,
we can determine a rudimentary level of interaction between the
two users. We counted the total number of messages from friends
of a distributor (N all;j , refer to Eq. (5)) and also counted the number
of messages from a speciﬁc friend of the distributor ðN i;j Þ.
Previous studies of recommender systems have used a variety
of ampliﬁcation methods (Breese et al., 1998). Our goal was to amplify user i’s preference to predict user j’s ratings, so we ampliﬁed
the Pearson’s correlation between users i and j as follows



 
Ni;j
;1
Min qij Â 1 þ
Nall;j

ð5Þ

In this formula, qij is the Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient between
user i and user j, Ni;j is the number of messages from user ito user
j, and N all;j is the total number of messages from user j’s friends to
user j. Because the correlation coefﬁcient cannot be greater than
1, we chose the minimum value between the ampliﬁed correlation
coefﬁcient and 1.

Group
Experiment
Experiment
Experiment
Experiment

Top 30 (p-value) Top 40 (p-value) Top 50 (p-value)
1
2
3
4

Traditional
Social
Combined
Ampliﬁed

0.189
0.921
0.543
0.817

0.194

0.636

0.662
0.529

0.625
0.750

*Signiﬁcance level (alpha) = 0.05.

5. Results
This section compares the performance of each experiment described in Section 4. Fig. 6 shows the average MAE values from the
four experiments when the number of neighbors was set at 30, 40,
and 50.
As shown in Fig. 6 and Table 2, the average MAE values differed
considerably among the four approaches. Incorporating the level of
interaction data and Pearson’s correlations simultaneously did not
appear to improve the accuracy compared to traditional CF methodology. However, when the nearest neighbors and social network
group were combined, accuracy improved signiﬁcantly from an
average MAE of 0.79 to approximately 0.71, when calculated at
the level of Top 30, Top 40, and Top 50.
We performed the Jarque-Bera test5 to assess normality in our
data sets using XLSTAT. Next, we compared their means, which are
summarized in Table 1. The null hypothesis was that the sample
would have a normal distribution. Since all the computed p-values
were above the level of signiﬁcance, we accepted the null hypothesis
for all data sets.
Table 2 presents the results of the experiments at the level of
Top 30, Top 40, and Top 50. Generally, the MAE values were highest
in Experiment 2 and lowest in Experiment 3.
To test differences among the MAE values in the four experiments, we conducted an ANOVA and Duncan’s test. The null
hypothesis was that the experiments would produce identical
average MAE values. Since all the computed p-values were lower
than the level of acceptance, we rejected the null hypothesis. The
lower-right part of Table 2 shows the difference in performance
among experiments statistically using the results of Duncan’s test.
Generally, the average MAE values can be interpreted as lowest in
Experiment 3 and highest in Experiment 2. The average MAE values were similar in Experiments 1 and 4, and were at a level between the values from Experiments 2 and 3.

5
From Wikipedia, URL:http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jarque-Bera_test, accessed
January 15, 2008.

4778

F. Liu, H.J. Lee / Expert Systems with Applications 37 (2010) 4772–4778

Table 2
Performance of each experiment.
Group
Experiment
Experiment
Experiment
Experiment
*

Top 30
1
2
3
4

Traditional
Social
Combined
Ampliﬁed

0.7915
0.8216a
0.7125
0.7899

Top 40

Top 50

Top 30 F-value (p-value)

0.7828

0.7968

78.751 (0.0001)

0.7098
0.7915

0.7139
0.7859

Duncan’s
2 > 1; 4 > 3

*

Top 40 F-value (p-value)
101.143 (0.0001)
Duncan’s
2 > 1; 4 > 3

*

Top 50 F-value (p-value)
73.812 (0.0001)*
Duncan’s
2 > 1; 4 > 3

a
Because Experiment 2 only used friends’ data of a distributor, its performance was not related to the number of neighbors.
Signiﬁcance level(alpha) = 0.05.

6. Discussion and conclusions
Our results indicate that hybrid approaches utilizing social network information are effective in CF methodologies for enhancing
recommendation performance. Combining the nearest neighbors
and social network information greatly improves prediction accuracy. In addition, utilizing a social network group as a neighborhood group dramatically reduces the computation required for
traditional CF, while achieving similar levels of prediction
accuracy.
Commercial Web sites may contain either explicit or implicit
social network information. Social networking Web sites have explicit social network information, enabling users to connect and
interact in various ways as friends within a network. Incorporating
the social network information from social networking Web sites
enables more accurate prediction performance. In contrast, nonsocial networking Web sites may contain implicit social network
information. If a Web site allows group interaction functions such
as community and group discussion forums, we can gather implicit
membership information from it. Future research will be required
to test how this implicit social network information affects recommendation performance.
Our experiments were conducted in a laboratory environment,
which differs to some extent from a real-world information-seeking context. In addition, social networks exist worldwide, and our
research was limited to the Cyworld Web site in South Korea. Future research should include a larger scope of social network systems extending to multinational social networks. Previous
studies have investigated social networks at Level 2 (e.g., friends
of friends of a user), while our work only reached Level 1 (friends
of a user). Future research may extend to Levels 2 or 3 in a social
network.
When we applied friends’ preference information, we utilized
data from all friends of a distributor because we only collected
information from a small number of friends, 12 on average. If a social networking Web site includes many friends for each user, it
should be possible to use friends’ data selectively; this selective
usage of friends’ data will be a topic for future research.
Acknowledgement
This work was supported by the Catholic University of Korea,
Research Fund, 2007.
References
Adomavicius, G., & Tuzhilin, A. (2005). Personalization technologies: A processoriented perspective. Communication of the ACM, 48(10), 83–90.

Ansari, A., Essegaier, S., & Kohli, R. (2000). Internet recommendation systems.
Journal of Marketing Research, 37(3), 363–375.
Avesani, P., Massa, P., & Tiella, R. (2005). A trust-enhanced recommender system
application: Moleskiing. In SAC ’05: Proceedings of the 2005 ACM symposium on
applied computing.
Breese, J. S., Heckerman, D., & Kadie, C. (1998). Empirical analysis of predictive
algorithms for collaborative ﬁltering. Paper presented at the 14th conference on
uncertainty in artiﬁcial intelligence, Madison, WI, USA.
Cho, Y. H., Kim, J. K., & Kim, S. H. (2002). A personalized recommender system based
on web usage mining and decision tree induction. Expert Systems with
Applications, 23(3), 329–342.
Golbeck, J. (2006). Generating predictive movie recommendations from trust in social
networks. Paper presented at the iTrust.
Granovetter, M. S. (1973). The strength of weak ties. The American Journal of
Sociology, 78(6), 1360–1380.
Haubl, G., & Murray, K. B. (2006). Double agent: Assessing the role of electronic
product-recommendation systems. Sloan Management Review, 47(3), 8–12.
Haubl, G., & Trifts, V. (2000). Consumer decision making in online shopping
environments: The effects of interactive decision aids. Marketing Science, 19(1),
4–21.
Herlocker, J. L., Konstan, J. A., Terveen, L. G., & Riedl, J. T. (2004). Evaluating
collaborative ﬁltering recommender systems. ACM Transactions on Information
Systems, 22(1), 5–53.
Iijima, J., & Ho, S. (2007). Common structure and properties of ﬁltering systems.
Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 6(2), 139–145.
Kautz, H., Selman, B., & Shah, M. (1997). ReferralWeb: Combining social networks
and collaborative ﬁltering. Communications of the ACM, 40(3), 77–87.
Kim, J. K., Kim, H. K., & Cho, Y. H. (2006). A user-oriented contents recommendation
system in peer-to-peer architecture. Expert Systems with Applications.
Kim, C. Y., Lee, J. K., Cho, Y. H., & Kim, D. H. (2004). Viscors: A visual-content
recommender for the mobile web. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 19(6), 32–39.
Lee, H. J., & Park, S. J. (2007). MONERS: A news recommender for the mobile web.
Expert Systems with Applications, 32(1), 143–150.
Liu, H., & Maes, P. (2005). InterestMap: Harvesting social network proﬁles for
recommendations. Paper presented at the IUI’05, San Diego, California.
Massa, P., & Avesani, P. (2007). Trust-aware recommender systems. In RecSys ’07:
Proceedings of the 2007 ACM conference on recommender systems.
Pennock, D. M., Horvitz, E., & Giles, C. L. (2000). Social choice theory and
recommender systems: Analysis of the axiomatic foundations of collaborative
ﬁltering. In Paper presented at the proceedings of the 17th national conference on
artiﬁcial intelligence (AAAI-2000).
Resnick, P., Iacovou, N., Suchak, M., Bergstrom, P., & Riedl, J. (1994). GroupLens: An
open architecture for collaborative ﬁltering of netnews. In Paper presented at the
proceedings of the 1994 ACM conference on computer supported cooperative work
Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States.
Resnick, P., & Varian, H. R. (1997). Recommender systems. Communications of the
ACM, 40(3), 56–58.
Ryu, Y., Kim, H. K., Cho, Y. H., & Kim, J. K. (2006). Peer-oriented content
recommendation in a social network. In Paper presented at the 16th workshop
on informaton techonologies and systems (WITS 2006).
Schonfeld, E. (2006). Cyworld attacks! business 2.0 (Vol. 7(7)).
Shardanand, U., & Maes, P. (1995). Social information ﬁltering: Algorithms for
automating word of mouth. In Paper presented at the ACM CHI’95 conference on
human factors in computing systems.
Sinha, R., & Swearingen, K. (2001). Comparing recommendations made by online
systems and friends. In Paper presented at the second DELOS network of excellence
workshop on personalization and recommender systems in digital libraries.
Tam, K. Y., & Ho, S. Y. (2006). Understanding the impact of web personalization on
user information processing and decision outcomes. MIS Quarterly, 30(4),
865–890.
Ziegler, C.-N., & Lausen, G. (2004). Analyzing correlation between trust and user
similarity in online communities. In Paper presented at the second international
conference on trust management.

