Jimeno and Aguilera Journal of Biology 2010, 9:6
http://jbiol.com/content/9/1/6

MINIREVIEW

The THO complex as a key mRNP biogenesis factor
in development and cell differentiation
Sonia Jimeno and Andrés Aguilera*
See research article http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/1

Abstract
The THO complex is a key component in the
co-transcriptional formation of messenger
ribonucleoparticles that are competent to be exported
from the nucleus, yet its precise function is unknown.
A recent study in BMC Biology on the role of the THOC5
subunit in cell physiology and mouse development
provides new clues to the role of the THO complex in
cell differentiation.

RNAPII

THO

Sus1/
ENY2
Sus1/
ENY2
THSC/
TREX-2

As soon as the pre-mRNA has been transcribed from
DNA in the nucleus, it is processed into a mature
ribonucleoprotein (mRNP) particle, which is competent
to be exported from the nucleus. The THO complex, a
nuclear protein complex conserved from yeast to
humans, is involved in the biogenesis of mRNP particles
and functions at the interface between transcription and
RNA export (Figure 1).
Although it is now clear that the THO complex has a
role in RNA metabolism, the initial studies that ended in
the identification of this key complex had nothing to do
with transcription, mRNP biogenesis or RNA export. The
first known component of THO, Hpr1, was identi­fied
through a genetic screen for hyper-recom­binant mutants
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Subsequent genetic and
molecular characterization of mutants in which the hpr1
gene had been deleted (hpr1∆ mutants) linked the hpr1∆
hyper-recombination phenotype to transcription and
showed that Hpr1 was involved in transcriptional
elongation. Tho2 was then identified as a high-copynumber suppressor of hpr1∆. Yeast tho2∆ mutants also
showed a strong hyper-recombination phenotype that
was linked to a transcription elongation defect (reviewed
in [1]).
*Correspondence: aguilo@us.es
Centro Andaluz de Biología Molecular y Medicina Regenerativa, Av. Américo
Vespucio s/n, 41092 Sevilla, Spain
© 2010 BioMed Central Ltd

© 2010 BioMed Central Ltd

Mex67/ Sub2/
TAP
UAP56
Mtr2/
Yra1/
p15
ALY

SAGA

Nab2

mRNA

Nucleus
NPC

Cytoplasm

Figure 1. The THO complex functions in mRNP biogenesis at
the interface between transcription and export of mRNA from
the nucleus. Proteins are shown with their yeast name followed by
the name of the human homolog, where the two differ, for Nab2,
Mtr2/p15, Sub2/UAP56, Mex67/TAP, Yra1/ALY, or with the yeast name
followed by the Drosophila name for Sus1/ENY2. Protein complexes
are shown in capital letters: THO, THSC (also called TREX-2) and SAGA.
Proteins that interact with each other or between which a physical
connection has been reported are in the same color. Sus1 can act
as a subunit of both THSC and SAGA complexes. Unlabeled proteins
in gray represent other factors important for mRNP biogenesis and
export. NPC, nuclear pore complex; RNAPII, RNA polymerase II.

Hyper-recombination could have been seen as just a
side effect of the physiological consequences of THO
mutations, but it turned out to reveal a role for THO in
forming an optimal mRNP particle, one that prevents the
nascent RNA from interacting with the DNA template. In
hpr1∆ mutants, the nascent RNA forms an RNA-DNA
hybrid (R-loop) with the DNA template strand, while the
other DNA strand remains single stranded; the formation
of such ‘R-loops’ is linked to hyper-recombination
(reviewed in [1]). Research from an increasing number of
laboratories has revealed THO to be a conserved nuclear
factor with a key function in mRNP biogenesis and
export as well as in development and cell differentiation.
A recently reported analysis [2] of a conditional knockout

Jimeno and Aguilera Journal of Biology 2010, 9:6
http://jbiol.com/content/9/1/6

mouse of the THOC5 subunit of THO adds new per­
spectives to the role of THO in differentiation.

THO as a conserved physical and functional unit
with a role in mRNP biogenesis
The yeast THO complex was first purified from
Saccharomyces cerevisiae with a tagged His(6)-Tho2
under high-salt conditions as a robust four-subunit
complex formed by Tho2, Hpr1, Mft1 and Thp2. Null
mutations in all THO components confer the same
phenotypes - transcription impairment, hyperrecombination and defective RNA export - indi­cat­ing
that THO is a functional and physical unit. Further
purification of the THO complex together with the
mRNA export factors Yra1 and Sub2, the latter of which
is an RNA-dependent ATPase involved in mRNA export,
in a larger complex termed TREX (transcription-export
complex), and the identification of Sub2 as a high-copy
suppressor of hpr1∆ led to the connection of THO with
RNA export (reviewed in [1]). This conclusion was
strength­ened by the observation that sub2 mutants led to
a similar transcription-dependent hyper-recombination
phenotype to that of THO-complex mutants and that
these also show RNA-export defects. Nevertheless, the
physical interactions among the THO components are
much stronger than those with other components of
TREX. THO is stable in high salt conditions in the
absence of Yra1 and in which Sub2 is present in trace
amounts that can be detected only by western blotting
(reviewed in [1]). Indeed, the integrity of the yeast THO
complex requires Hpr1, Tho2, Mft1 and Thp2 but not
Sub2 [3]. The human or Drosophila THO complexes also
contain hTho2/THOC2, hHpr1/THOC1, Tex1/THOC3
and three additional subunits called THOC5, THOC6
and THOC 7. The Sub2 ortholog UAP56 can be detected
in low amounts in Drosophila and is absent in human
cells immunodepleted of hTho2, indicating that in these
organisms the core THO complex exists as a salt-resistant
stable complex independent of UAP56 and Yra1 [4,5].
In yeast, THO binds to active chromatin in an RNAindependent manner. A plausible scenario is as follows
(Figure 1): THO could be one of the first players to act
during transcription elongation to facilitate a correct
mRNP formation helping recruit other factors, such as
Sub2 or Mex67 [6]. Other RNA binding proteins, such as
Yra1, which interacts with Sub2, and the Mex67-Mtr2
export factor, could act at subsequent steps in this
scenario to bring the mRNP to the nuclear pore complex.
THO helps recruit Mex67 to the mRNP through Hpr1,
an interaction that is regulated by Rsp5, an ubiquitin
ligase that polyubiquitinates Hpr1 [7]. Close to the
nuclear pore complex, the THSC complex, also termed
TREX-2, could have an as-yet unknown function in
mRNP biogenesis and export. Interestingly, mutations in

Page 2 of 3

THSC confer the same phenotypes of transcription
elongation impairment, defective RNA export and
transcription-dependent hyper-recombination as do
THO mutations (reviewed in [1]).
Human THO associates with proteins of the spliceo­
some and with spliced RNAs, this latter interaction being
independent of transcription [4,8]. However, there is also
evidence for transcription-dependent recruitment of
THO to chromatin in Drosophila [9]. The role of THO in
mRNP metabolism therefore may be general among
eukaryotes. The recent observation that Drosophila THO
complex interacts with ENY2, a protein previously
identified as a transcriptional activator that interacts with
the SAGA transcription factor, opens up the possibility of
a co-transcriptional action of THO in higher eukaryotes
[9]. The impact of THO in RNA physiology, however,
may go beyond transcription elongation and its asso­cia­
ted RNA metabolism steps, as shown by the involvement
of THO in mRNA 3’ end processing, whether or not
direct, and by the identification in yeast THO mutants of
a larger nuclear macromolecular structure containing
components of the nuclear pore complex and poly­
adenylation factors [10].

Function of THO in development and
differentiation
The relevance of THO in cell physiology has been clearly
shown from yeast to humans. Yeast THO null mutants
are sick and slow growers and THO depletion has a
negative effect on growth rate of human and Drosophila
cell lines. THO is required for viability of the early mouse
embryo and for postnatal survival, as determined by a
THOC1 knockout [2,11]. Whether the relevance of THO
function is a consequence of a general, genome-wide role
or whether its role is limited to a subset of genes is still an
open question. In humans and Drosophila, various
studies have shown that THO is required for the export
of heat shock mRNAs, but nothing is known about other
mRNAs. Similarly, it is unknown whether THO function
is required equally in different cell tissues and throughout
development and differentiation. Importantly, however,
THOC1 conditional knockout mice reveal abnormal
testis development that causes sterility [12]. Under­stand­
ing the relevance of THO in development and tissue
differentiation as well as its putative impact in cancer and
cell proliferation should provide a better understanding
of its functional role.
One step towards this understanding is the report by
Mancini et al. [2], who have constructed and charac­ter­
ized an interferon-inducible cre-recombinase based
conditional THOC5 knockout mouse. THOC5 deletion
causes death in the first 2 weeks, similar to THOC1
deletion. Mice with the conditional knockout develop
acute leukocytopenia (a reduction in white blood cell

Jimeno and Aguilera Journal of Biology 2010, 9:6
http://jbiol.com/content/9/1/6

numbers) and anemia (a reduction in red blood cell
numbers). The number of blood cells in peripheral blood
is reduced drastically; this is caused by apoptosis of bone
marrow cells and loss of committed myeloid progenitor
cells and of cells with long-term reconstituting potential.
The transfer of normal bone marrow cells rescued 70% of
the mice from death. The data [2] support the hypothesis
that THOC5 is critical in bone marrow and in hemato­
poiesis, but not for hepatocytes and heart muscles. The
results are consistent with previous work from this same
group (referenced in [2]) showing that human THOC5
affects granulocyte/macrophage differentiation and
adipo­cyte differentiation, and further support the idea
that the THO complex has a key role not only in early
embryogenesis, but also in differentiation, as previously
reported with THOC1 knockout mice [11,12].
In the near future it would be interesting to know
whether the subunits of the THO complex have different
roles in the differentiation of distinct cell types. And it
would certainly be important to understand how the role
of the THO complex in development and differentiation
is related to its molecular function in mRNP biogenesis
and export. Among the various possibilities that would
need to be investigated to understand the role of this
intriguing complex in differentiation are whether or not
the THO complex has specific functions in different cell
types and how this might be related to particular func­
tions that THO could have for specific target mRNAs or
depending on the putative THO protein modifications
(phosphorylation, ubiquitination, and so on) that might
change its pattern of activity.
Acknowledgements
We thank R Luna and AG Rondón for critical reading of the manuscript. The
work of AA’s laboratory is funded by the Spanish Ministry of Innovation and
Junta de Andalucía.
Published: 28 January 2010

Page 3 of 3

References
1.	 Aguilera A: Cotranscriptional mRNP assembly: from the DNA to the nuclear
pore. Curr Opin Cell Biol 2005, 17:242-250.
2.	 Mancini A, Niemann-Seyde SC, Pankow R, El Bounkari O, Klebba-Farber S,
Koch A, Jaworska E, Spooncer E, Gruber AD, Whetton AD, Tamura T:
THOC5/FMIP, an mRNA export TREX complex protein, is essential for
hematopoietic primitive cell survival in vivo. BMC Biol 2010, 8:1.
3. 	 Huertas P, García-Rubio ML, Wellinger RE, Luna R and Aguilera A: An hpr1
point mutation that impairs transcription and mRNP biogenesis without
increasing recombination. Mol Cell Biol 2006, 26:7451-7465.
4.	 Masuda S, Das R, Cheng H, Hurt E, Dorman N, Reed R: Recruitment of the
human TREX complex to mRNA during splicing. Genes Dev 2005,
19:1512-1517.
5.	 Rehwinkel J, Herold A, Gari K, Kocher T, Rode M, Ciccarelli FL, Wilm M,
Izaurralde E: Genome-wide analysis of mRNAs regulated by the THO
complex in Drosophila melanogaster. Nat Struct Mol Biol 2004, 11:558-566.
6.	 Zenklusen D, Vinciguerra P, Wyss JC, Stutz F: Stable mRNP formation and
export require cotranscriptional recruitment of the mRNA export factors
Yra1p and Sub2p by Hpr1p. Mol Cell Biol 2002, 22:8241-8253.
7.	 Hobeika M, Brockmann C, Gruessing F, Neuhaus D, Divita G, Stewart M,
Dargemont C: Structural requirements for the ubiquitin-associated
domain of the mRNA export factor Mex67 to bind its specific targets, the
transcription elongation THO complex component Hpr1 and nucleoporin
FXFG repeats. J Biol Chem 2009, 284:17575-17583.
8.	 Cheng H, Dufu K, Lee CS, Hsu JL, Dias A and Reed R: Human mRNA export
machinery recruited to the 5’ end of mRNA. Cell 2006, 127:1389-1400.
9.	 Kopytova DV, Orlova AV, Krasnov AN, Gurskiy DY, Nikolenko JV, Nabirochkina
EN, Shidlovskii YV, Georgieva SG: Multifunctional factor ENY2 is associated
with the THO complex and promotes its recruitment onto nascent mRNA.
Genes Dev 2010, 24:86-96.
10.	 Rougemaille M, Dieppois G, Kisseleva-Romanova E, Gudipati RK, Lemoine S,
Blugeon C, Boulay J, Jensen TH, Stutz F, Devaux F, Libri D: THO/Sub2p
functions to coordinate 3’-end processing with gene-nuclear pore
association. Cell 2008, 135:308-321.
11.	 Wang X, Chang Y, Li Y, Zhang X, Goodrich DW: Thoc1/Hpr1/p84 is essential
for early embryonic development in the mouse. Mol Cell Biol 2006,
26:4362-4367.
12.	 Wang X, Chinnam M, Wang J, Wang Y, Zhang X, Marcon E, Moens P, Goodrich
DW: Thoc1 deficiency compromises gene expression necessary for normal
testis development in the mouse. Mol Cell Biol 2009, 29:2794-2803.

doi:10.1186/jbiol217
Cite this article as: Jimeno S, Aguilera A: The THO complex as a key mRNP
biogenesis factor in development and cell differentiation. Journal of Biology
2010, 9:6.

