Bely and Sikes Journal of Biology 2010, 9:14
http://jbiol.com/content/9/2/14

MINIREVIEW

Acoel and platyhelminth models for stem-cell
research
Alexandra E Bely1* and James M Sikes2*
See research article http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/9/69

Abstract
Acoel and platyhelminth worms are particularly
attractive invertebrate models for stem-cell research
because their bodies are continually renewed from
large pools of somatic stem cells. Several recent
studies, including one in BMC Developmental Biology,
are beginning to reveal the cellular dynamics and
molecular basis of stem-cell function in these animals.

Adult somatic stem cells can play critical roles in
postembryonic developmental processes such as tissue
renewal, growth, repair, and regeneration [1].
Understanding how such cells are maintained and
produce differentiated progeny is thus of general interest
in developmental biology, in addition to being of clear
biomedical relevance. Invertebrate models have great
potential for elucidating the cellular and molecular basis
of stem-cell function. However, in the main invertebrate
models used for dissecting the details of animal
development, including Drosophila and Caenorhabditis,
adult somatic tissues are primarily post-mitotic and are
largely or entirely devoid of adult stem cells, which limits
the use of these established models for stem-cell research.
Representatives of two groups of soft-bodied worms, the
Acoela and the Platyhelminthes, possess large pools of
adult somatic stem cells, making them useful invertebrate
models for stem-cell biology. These organisms are now
beginning to provide new insights into the cellular and
molecular basis of adult stem-cell function.

*Correspondence: Alexandra E Bely. Email: abely@umd.edu; James M Sikes.
Email: jsikes@illinois.edu
1
Biology Department, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA
2
Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Illinois, Urbana,
IL 61801, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2010 BioMed Central Ltd

© 2010 BioMed Central Ltd

A remarkable stem-cell system in platyhelminth
and acoel worms
Thomas Hunt Morgan’s classic experiments on the
amazing regenerative abilities of planarians (phylum
Platyhelminthes) helped fuel the early study of adult stem
cells. In particular, these studies ultimately led to the
discovery that planarians possess a very unusual stemcell system [2]: the body of a planarian is continually
rebuilt from a large pool of somatic stem cells, called
neoblasts, that are distributed throughout the animal.
Neoblasts are the only mitotically active cells in the body
and constantly proliferate to renew all cell types.
Neoblasts are thus required for whole-body homeostasis
and are likewise responsible for forming new tissues by
growth and regeneration in these animals. Other
platyhelminths also possess a similar stem-cell system,
including one of the most basal lineages within the
phylum, the macrostomids [3]. Thus, it is likely that
possession of neoblasts is ancestral for the
Platyhelminthes.
Although unusual among animals in general, a neoblast
stem cell system is also known from a group of small,
soft-bodied marine worms known as acoels. In a recent
study published in BMC Developmental Biology, De
Mulder et al. [4] present the first detailed characterization
of this stem cell system in acoels. Working with the acoel
Isodiametra pulchra, De Mulder et al. investigated
neoblast
distribution
and
proliferation
using
morphological analyses and S-phase cell labelling and
also characterized in these animals the expression and
function of a conserved stem-cell regulator.
Acoels have historically been placed within the
Platyhelminthes, but recent molecular phylogenetic
analyses now suggest that they probably represent a
distinct phylum, the Acoela, that falls well outside of the
Platyhelminthes (see [5] and references therein).
Specifically, acoels are now thought to represent the most
basal lineage within the Bilateria, being the sister group
to all other bilaterian animals (Figure 1a). That a similar
neoblast system is found in both Platyhelminthes and
Acoela has important implications for the evolution of

Bely and Sikes Journal of Biology 2010, 9:14
http://jbiol.com/content/9/2/14

Deuterostomia

(a)

Page 2 of 4

(b)

Lophotrochozoa

Platyhelminthes
Schmidtea/Dugesia
Macrostomum

(c)
Neoblast
Self-renewal

Schmidtea/Dugesia
Somatic cell
differentiation

Germ line
specification/differentiation

Ecdysozoa

Macrostomum

Cnidaria

Acoela
Isodiametra
Isodiametra

Figure 1. Two groups of soft-bodied worms, the platyhelminths and the acoels, possess an unusual stem cell system. (a) The current view
of animal phylogeny indicates that Platyhelminthes and Acoela represent distinct evolutionary lineages, with acoels representing the outgroup to
the rest of the Bilateria (namely, the Deuterostomia, Lophotrochozoa, and Ecdysozoa). Whether their similar stem-cell systems are homologous or
convergent remains an open question. The biology of these stem cells is currently being investigated in the planarians Schmidtea and Dugesia, the
macrostomid Macrostomum, and the acoel Isodiametra. (b) Somatic stem cells called neoblasts (green dots) are distributed in the parenchyma
throughout much of the body of planarians, macrostomids, and acoels. (c) Neoblasts can self-renew, produce differentiated somatic cell types, and
produce germ-line cells. Neoblasts are morphologically characterized by a large nucleus-to-cytoplasm ratio relative to differentiated cells (nuclei
represented by gray shading).

this unusual mode of homeostasis. If acoels are indeed
the outgroup to all other bilaterians, the neoblast stemcell system may have evolved convergently in acoels and
platyhelminths or, alternatively, may even be ancestral for
all bilaterian animals.
Because of their unusual neoblast system,
platyhelminths and acoels are particularly attractive
invertebrate models for stem-cell research. They present
a number of advantages, including the fact that a large
pool of stem cells is available throughout the lifetime of
each individual; the stem-cell pool is collectively
totipotent, not just pluripotent (neoblasts can even give
rise to the germ line); these stem cells exhibit high rates
of turnover, undergoing continual self-renewal and
production of differentiated progeny; and neoblasts are
the only proliferative cells in the body while the rest of
the body is post-mitotic, making it possible to selectively
disrupt large pools of stem cells in vivo through wholebody irradiation or other techniques.

Cellular and molecular dynamics of neoblasts
Several platyhelminth and acoel species are being
developed into powerful models for investigating stem
cell biology. Although Dugesia was Morgan’s original
planarian subject, species in the closely related genus
Schmidtea have rapidly become the best characterized of
the planarians. As the research community working on

this genus has grown, robust techniques have become
available for marking and manipulating stem cells in this
group and important genomic tools have been developed,
including a fully sequenced genome for S. mediterranea
(reviewed in [1]). Smaller research communities have
also begun working on the stem cell biology of the
macrostomid Macrostomum lignano and, most recently,
the acoel Isodiametra pulchra. Collectively, these studies
are beginning to reveal the generalities as well as the
unique properties of this similar neoblast stem-cell
system employed in different animal groups.
The in vivo cellular dynamics of neoblasts are
remarkably similar in platyhelminths and acoels. In
planarians, macrostomids, and acoels, neoblasts reside
exclusively within the parenchyma, although the exact
spatial distribution of neoblasts within the body varies
slightly among these different groups (Figure 1b) [4,6,7].
Neoblast progeny then disperse out from the
parenchyma, giving rise to new differentiated cells of the
body. A recent microarray study in planarians indicates
that the self-renewing neoblast population has a specific
transcriptional profile and that the recent progeny of
neoblasts express a sequence of distinct transcriptional
profiles as they migrate and begin to differentiate [7].
Interestingly, in that study, several chromatin-modifying
factors were found to be expressed in neoblasts,
consistent with the idea that chromatin modification may

Bely and Sikes Journal of Biology 2010, 9:14
http://jbiol.com/content/9/2/14

play an important role in permitting cells to maintain an
undifferentiated state.
Because neoblasts are the only proliferative cells within
the body, irradiation that kills proliferating cells
selectively destroys neoblasts. Studies carried out
decades ago showed that in planarians, destroying the
neoblast population of adults by whole-body irradiation
results in gradual malformation of the body (as tissues
fail to be renewed) and eventually death [2]. Destruction
of the neoblast pool in planarians also abrogates the
typically extensive regenerative ability of these animals.
The study of De Mulder et al. demonstrates that in acoels
irradiation dramatically reduces cell proliferation,
abolishes the expression of a stem cell marker, and
ultimately leads to death [4], indicating that neoblasts are
required for homeostasis in acoels, as they are
platyhelminths. The selective destruction of neoblasts by
irradiation is a powerful tool in these animals. For
example, a key aspect of the microarray study described
above was the comparison of irradiated and unirradiated
planarian tissue to reveal neoblast-specific genes [7].

PIWI gene expression and function in neoblasts
Robust methods for in situ hybridization and gene knockdown via RNA interference (RNAi) have now been
developed for both platyhelminths and acoels, and these
are providing insight into the molecular basis of the
various functions of neoblasts [1,4,8] (Figure 1c). One
group of genes, the PIWI genes, has received particular
attention as conserved regulators of stem-cell function.
PIWI genes are a subfamily of the PIWI/Argonaute gene
family and, in most animals investigated, are expressed
specifically in the germ line, where they are thought to
function in silencing transposons and translational gene
regulation. In Schmidtea and Macrostomum, transcripts
of piwi homologs are present not only in the germ line
but also in the neoblasts, and gene knockdown by RNAi
results in the eventual loss of both the germ-line and the
neoblast pool [6,9]. De Mulder et al. [4] now find that a
piwi homolog is also expressed in both germ line and
neoblasts in Isodiametra. RNAi knockdown of its
expression causes loss of the germ line but, unexpectedly,
does not affect the neoblast pool or its proliferation.
Whether there are other piwi homologs expressed
redundantly in the neoblasts of this species remains to be
determined.
Although the pattern of piwi homolog gene
transcription in Schmidtea, Macrostomum and
Isodiametra, coupled with the RNAi phenotype (neoblast
depletion) in the first two, might suggest that piwi
homologs are involved specifically in the self-renewal of
neoblasts, this may not actually be the case. PIWI protein
distribution has been characterized in both Schmidtea
and Isodiametra, and in these animals PIWI protein is

Page 3 of 4

detected not only in neoblasts but also in recent neoblast
progeny that are committed to differentiate [4,10].
Furthermore, the RNAi phenotype of at least one
planarian piwi homolog indicates that neoblasts can
persist and proliferate for many days following RNAi
treatment, and that during this time their progeny can
still migrate to wound sites and become incorporated
into tissues, but they fail to differentiate properly [9].
Therefore, the primary function of piwi in these animals
may not be in stem-cell self-renewal but rather in
potentiating the proper differentiation of neoblast
progeny. The neoblast depletion RNAi phenotype
observed might thus be due not to a specific failure of
neoblast self-renewal but rather to exhaustion of the
neoblast pool, resulting from an exceedingly high
demand for differentiated cells as normal homeostasis
fails.

Future directions
Characterizing the molecular properties of neoblasts and
their non-neoblast progeny is unquestionably an
important component of understanding the functioning
of these remarkable stem cells. However, current research
in stem-cell biology is providing increasing evidence that
the behaviors and fates of stem cells are not inherent,
cell-autonomous properties, but are instead critically
dependent on external cues and feedback control [11].
Thus, to obtain a complete picture of how neoblasts
function, it will be at least as important to understand the
undoubtedly complex inputs that are integrated by these
cells as they choose between alternative potential fates.
Acknowledgements
We thank members of Phil Newmark’s lab for helpful discussion and Leo
Shapiro for comments on the manuscript. AEB is supported by NSF grant
IOS 0920502.
Author details
1
Biology Department, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA
2
Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, 601 South Goodwin Avenue, Urbana, IL 61801, USA
Published: 16 February 2010
References
1.	 Pellettieri J, Sánchez Alvarado A: Cell turnover and adult tissue homeostasis:
From humans to planarians. Annu Rev Genet 2007, 41:83-105.
2.	 Reddien PW, Sánchez Alvarado A: Fundamentals of planarian regeneration.
Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2004, 20:725-757.
3.	 Ladurner P, Rieger R, Baguñà J: Spatial distribution and differentiation
potential of stem cells in hatchlings and adults in the marine
platyhelminth Macrostomum sp.: a bromodeoxyuridine analysis. Dev Biol
2000, 226:231-241.
4.	 De Mulder K, Kuales G, Pfister D, Willems M, Egger B, Salvenmoser W, Thaler
M, Gorny AK, Hrouda M, Borgonie G, Ladurner P: Characterization of the
stem cell system of the acoel Isodiametra pulchra. BMC Dev Biol 2009, 9:69.
5.	 Paps J, Baguñà J, Riutort M: Lophotrochozoa internal phylogeny: new
insights from an up-to-date analysis of nuclear ribosomal genes. Proc Biol
Sci 2009, 276:1245-1254.
6.	 De Mulder K, Pfister D, Kuales G, Egger B, Salvenmoser W, Willems M, Steger J,
Fauster K, Micura R, Borgonie G, Ladurner P: Stem cells are differentially

Bely and Sikes Journal of Biology 2010, 9:14
http://jbiol.com/content/9/2/14

7.	
8.	

9.	

regulated during development, regeneration, and homeostasis in
flatworms. Dev Biol 2009, 334:198-212.
Eisenhoffer GT, Kang H, Sánchez Alvarado A: Molecular analysis of stem cells
and their descendents during cell turnover and regeneration in the
planarian Schmidtea mediterranea. Cell Stem Cell 2008, 3:327-339.
Pfister D, De Mulder K, Hartenstein V, Kuales G, G B, Marx F, Morris J,
Ladurner P: Flatworm stem cells and the germ line: Developmental and
evolutionary implications of macvasa expression in Macrostomum
lignano. Dev Biol 2008, 319:146-159.
Reddien PW, Oviedo NJ, Jennings JR, Jenkin JC, Sánchez Alvarado A:
SMEDWI-2 is a PIWI-like protein that regulates planarian stem cells. Science
2005, 310:1327-1330.

Page 4 of 4

10.	 Guo T, Peters AHFM, Newmark PA: A bruno-like gene is required for stem cell
maintenance in planarians. Dev Cell 2006, 11:159-169.
11.	 Lander AD: The ‘stem cell’ concept: is it holding us back? J Biol 2009, 8:70
See other regeneration and stem cell articles http://jbiol.com/content/8/8/70 and
http://jbiol.com/content/9/2/15

doi:10.1186/jbiol223
Cite this article as: Bely AE, Sikes JM: Acoel and platyhelminth models for
stem-cell research. Journal of Biology 2010, 9:14.

