Question & Answer

Q&A: What are pharmacological chaperones and why are they
interesting?
Dagmar Ringe and Gregory A Petsko

Address: Departments of Biochemistry and Chemistry and the Rosenstiel Center, Brandeis University, 415 South Street, Waltham,
MA 02454, USA.
Correspondence: Gregory A Petsko. Email: petsko@brandeis.edu. Dagmar Ringe. Email: ringe@brandeis.edu

What is a chaperone in the context of
pharmacology?

The term chaperone is borrowed from the name of a class
of proteins that function in living cells [1]. Protein
molecules are usually only marginally stable under
physiological conditions, so some percent of them are often
unfolded or misfolded. Such molecules can aggregate with
one another, or with properly functioning proteins, with
deleterious consequences to the cell. Protein chaperones
prevent these unwanted associations by sequestering
unfolded and misfolded proteins and providing them with
an environment in which they have the opportunity to
refold properly. In addition, the interior of a living cell is
an extremely crowded environment, in which the concen­
tration of macromolecules may exceed 100 μM [2,3]. As a
protein is being synthesized on the ribosome, protein
chaperones protect the nascent polypeptide chain from
undesirable associations in that crowded environment
until it can fold properly. In pharmacology, the role of a
chaperone is similar, but instead of being proteins,
pharma­cological chaperones are small molecules, and
instead of assisting in folding, they usually stabilize an
already folded macromolecule (usually a protein) by
binding to it and stabilizing it against thermal denaturation
and proteolytic degradation [4-6].

So a pharmacological chaperone is a
chemical chaperone?

No, a chemical chaperone is subtly different. Typical
chemical chaperones are molecules such as glycerol and
trehalose. Pharmacological chaperones are a special subset
of chemical chaperones. Molecules like glycerol and
trehalose are nonspecific: they bind to, and stabilize,
practically any protein and usually do not have a specific
binding site. Pharmacological chaperones, on the other
hand, are designed specifically to bind to their target
protein and, ideally, stabilize only that macromolecule. The
difference, therefore, is one of specificity: a chemical
chaperone used in vivo would stabilize virtually every
macro­molecule in the cell. A pharmacological chaperone
acts on, at most, only a small number of protein targets.

http://jbiol.com/content/8/9/80	

There is a great deal of excitement in the biomedical
community these days about pharmacological chaperones
because they may be the best approach to treating some
serious human diseases, such as cystic fibrosis.

How do they work?

Small-molecule chaperones act like molecular glue,
holding various parts of the protein structure together
through the favorable interactions (electrostatic, van der
Waals, and hydrogen bonding) they make with residues in
the binding site. Since specific ligand binding sites are
often located at the interfaces between protein domains or
subdomains [7], such ligands can be particularly effective
at stabilizing the whole protein structure.
Theoretically, a chemical chaperone could also act by
binding to and stabilizing the transition state of protein
folding (or a high-energy folding intermediate), which
would increase the rate of folding. None of the
pharmacological chaperones currently under development
appear to act this way, but such a mechanism might be
critical for secreted proteins, where slowly folding mutants
could be degraded even if the folded state was stable.

Could ligand binding ever destabilize a
protein?

It’s rare, but it has happened. Usually this occurs either
when the ligand induces a large conformational change in
its target protein when it binds, and the bound
conformation is inherently less stable, or when ligand
binding disrupts a number of protein self-interactions in
the binding site.

Why are small-molecule chaperones
important?

There are only a few immortal proteins in the human body.
Most proteins in all cell types turn over regularly. If such
proteins have a mutation that makes them less stable than
normal, they may be degraded more rapidly, thereby
lowering their steady-state levels below what is required to
maintain the health of the cell. Also, it is possible that the

Ringe and Petsko: Journal of Biology 2009, 8:80

80.2

unstable protein may aggregate when it unfolds, and such
aggregates may themselves be toxic to the cell. There are
many severe human diseases that arise from either muta­
tions that destabilize an essential protein or the agedependent build-up of toxic misfolded forms of normal
proteins [8]. A chemical or pharmacological chaperone can
stabilize the native fold of the protein, preventing
aggregation and restoring proper steady-state levels.

Where are chaperones important?

Protein chaperones function in most cellular compart­
ments, and small-molecule chaperones can do so as well,
in theory. In practice, not all subcellular compartments
may be permeable to a particular small-molecule chaperone.
There is a particular need for such chaperones in compart­
ments where proteins are subjected to unusual stress.
Examples might include the mitochondrion, where large
amounts of reactive oxygen species are present, the
lysozome, which has a low pH and a high content of
degradative enzymes, and the endoplasmic reticulum (ER),
where many unstable mutant proteins may misfold during
synthesis [9].

Can chemical chaperones be useful as drugs?

In theory, yes, and there are some efforts to use molecules
such as trehalose therapeutically, but in general it is
probably not desirable to stabilize most of the proteins in a
cell, so specific chaperones are preferable therapeutically.
In addition, the concentration of a chemical chaperone
required to achieve stability may be millimolar or even
molar, which is impractical for use in treatment.

For what sorts of diseases might
pharmacological chaperones be useful?

Obvious examples are the protein-misfolding diseases such
as cystic fibrosis, the amyloidoses, Parkinson’s disease,
Alzheimer’s disease and Lou Gehrig’s disease. Less
obviously, most metabolic disorders involve mutations that
destabilize proteins rather than simply inactivating them.
For example, Gaucher disease, an autosomal-recessive
lysosomal storage disorder, arises from mutations in the
gene coding for the lysosomal enzyme acid-β-glucosidase
(GCase). More than a hundred such mutations are known,
and only a handful are nonsense mutations or involve the
replacement of a residue in the active site of GCase. The
vast majority of the disease-causing mutations occur
randomly throughout the protein and lead to an unstable
form that is either degraded in the lysosome (where it
normally functions), or never manages to exit the ER in the
first place. Enzyme-replacement therapy using injections
of the normal enzyme can alleviate many of the symptoms
of Gaucher disease, but the injected enzyme does not reach
every affected organ system, and the treatment is onerous
and extremely expensive. In principle, a pharmacological
chaperone could be orally available, relatively inexpensive
and might be able to stabilize GCase in every tissue of the

http://jbiol.com/content/8/9/80	

body [10]. There are literally hundreds of diseases where
the ability to stabilize a specific protein could have similar
therapeutic benefits.

What kinds of molecules can act as specific
chaperones?

It has been known for decades that the binding of an
inhibitor to an enzyme stabilizes the enzyme against
thermal denaturation, sometimes by 10°C or more [11].
Structural biologists have taken advantage of this property
from the early days of protein crystallography: liganded
proteins tend to crystallize more readily than their
unliganded counterparts because their structures are more
stable. Therefore, the obvious candidates for specific
pharmacological chaperones for enzyme-related diseases
are enzyme inhibitors.

Wait a minute! How can an inhibitor, which by
definition interferes with a protein’s activity,
give you more active protein?

We should have said, reversible inhibitor. That is the key to
the use of active-site-directed ligands as pharmacological
chaperones. An inhibitor that binds irreversibly to a target
protein takes that protein out of circulation, activity-wise.
But a reversible inhibitor always allows the presence of
some equilibrium amount of free enzyme [12], which is
then available for substrate binding (which will also
stabilize the protein). The affinity of the inhibitor is also
important. If it binds too tightly, it may be effectively
irreversible. But if it binds too weakly, it may impossible to
supply a high enough concentration of the chaperone to be
effective. In practice, inhibitors with a Ki (equilibrium
disassociation constant) close to the Km (Michaelis-Menten
constant) of the substrate or a bit tighter seem to be useful.

Isn’t it possible that if you are trying to stabilize
a protein with a reversible inhibitor, you could
give so high a dose that it would still attenuate
the activity below necessary levels?

Yes, that is sometimes observed. Too high a dose of any
pharmacological chaperone that inhibits its target protein is
counterproductive, because it starts to reduce the activity.
The dosing regimen that can be used is limited by this. It
may be necessary to ‘spike’ the dose of the chaperone - that
is, for example, giving it three days on, four days off, or every
other day - rather than dosing continuously. Controlled
release may also be needed in some cases. It is also possible
that some mutated proteins may be so unstable that they
cannot be effectively chaperoned by inhibitors because the
concentration required to achieve beneficial stabilization
would lead to loss of activity.

Is it possible to stabilize an enzyme without
binding to the active site?

It should be, in theory. In practice, nearly all of the
pharmacological chaperones now under development are

Ringe and Petsko: Journal of Biology 2009, 8:80

80.3

active-site ligands. However, tight specific binding
anywhere on the surface of a protein ought to confer
stabilization as a result of the increased number of inter­
actions. The problem is how to find suitable sites. For
many years it was thought that essentially the whole
surface of a protein should be available for small-molecule
binding - that is, that proteins are sticky everywhere. But in
the early 1990s, one of us established that only a small
number of sites were actually available to bind organic
molecules, because tightly bound water prevents access to
much of the protein surface [13]. These sites can be
mapped crystallographically [14] and computationally [15].
Recently, these methods have been applied to a few
enzymes, such as GCase, for the purpose of identifying
sites other than the active site, known as exosites, that are
suitable for pharmacological chaperone binding. For
GCase a single exosite was identified and a library of small
organic compounds has been docked to that position on
the protein surface. The top 20 predicted binders were
screened for thermal stabilization of the enzyme in a
fluorescence-based assay. One compound was found that
increased thermal stabilization by several degrees (the
corresponding stabilization with a tight-binding inhibitor
is about 10°C). Whether such non-inhibitory chaperones
will work in vivo is still under investigation, but at least it
has been shown that they can work in vitro.

Has there been any clinical success with
pharmacological chaperones?

There has. It turns out that an established therapy for a
metabolic disorder probably works this way, but no one
recognized this until recently. Phenylketonuria (PKU) is
caused by mutations in the gene coding for the enzyme
phenylalanine hydroxylase. For years, one treatment for a
subset of patients with this disease was high doses of
tetrahydrobiopterin, the cofactor involved in the reaction
catalyzed by PKU. It has since been shown that most of the
PKU mutations destabilize the enzyme and, in some cases,
the increased levels of cofactor enable it to act as a
chaperone to stabilize the mutated enzyme [16]. Efforts are
under way to apply this technology to cystic fibrosis, the
prototypic genetic protein-folding disease, in which many
of the mutations, including the most common, lead to a
failure to produce enough properly folded protein, called
CFTR, in the right place in the cell [17].
In mouse models of obesity and type 2 diabetes, the
development of insulin resistance correlates with elevated
levels of ER stress and induction of the ‘unfolded protein
response’. Ozcan et al. [18] have shown that the chemical
chaperones phenylbutyric acid and taurine-conjugated
ursodeoxycholic acid, both of which are known to attenuate
ER stress [19], improve glucose tolerance and insulin
action in a mouse model of type 2 diabetes. These findings
offer a potential new approach to improve insulin action
and glucose tolerance in diabetic individuals.

http://jbiol.com/content/8/9/80	

A number of other pharmacological chaperones are in latestage clinical trials, including drugs for transthyretin-based
amyloidosis [20-22], the imino sugar isofagomine for
Gaucher disease [23-25], and 1-deoxygalactonojirimycin
for Anderson-Fabry disease [26]. All these compounds are
analogs of normal physiological substrates or reaction
products that interact with these proteins, and all have
shown efficacy in animal models of the disease. They have
been shown to be safe, and in some cases to have a
therapeutic effect in humans.

Do pharmacological chaperones have wider
potential?

The answer appears to be yes. Although most of the work
up to now has concerned the chaperoning of unstable
mutant proteins, there is no reason, in principle, why the
normal form of any protein cannot be stabilized in this
way, thereby increasing its steady-state level. Imagine
using a small-molecule chaperone to boost, perhaps
temporarily, the activity of a tumor suppressor such as p53
or a transcriptional regulator that controls the immune
response. Pharmacological chaperoning may be as effective
as gene therapy, and much easier to implement, whenever
elevated levels of a beneficial protein are desirable. But one
of the most exciting applications of small-molecule chaper­
oning may actually be its use in vitro. Biopharma­ceuticals
are relatively unstable, both during manufacture and in
storage. This is one reason why even injected human
proteins often cause an immune response: misfolded
proteins are known to break tolerance [27]. By including a
pharmacological chaperone in the manufacture and
storage of biopharmaceuticals it may be possible to reduce
or eliminate many of these problems. Combining the
chaperone with the biopharmaceutical during treatment
may also improve in vivo stability, reducing the need for
frequent dosing. Joint use of chemical and biological
therapeutics is, we think, an exciting new approach to the
treatment of disease.

References
1.	

Hartl FU, Hayer-Hartl M: Converging concepts of protein
folding in vitro and in vivo. Nat Struct Mol Biol 2009, 16:574581.

2.	

Ellis RJ: Macromolecular crowding: an important but
neglected aspect of the intracellular environment. Curr
Opin Struct Biol 2001, 11:114-119.

3.	

Goodsell DS: The Machinery of Life. New York: SpringerVerlag; 1992.

4.	

Leandro P, Gomes CM: Protein misfolding in conformational disorders: rescue of folding defects and chemical
chaperoning. Mini Rev Med Chem 2008, 8:901-911.

5.	

Arakawa T, Ejima D, Kita Y, Tsumoto K: Small molecule pharmacological chaperones: From thermodynamic stabilization to pharmaceutical drugs. Biochim Biophys Acta 2006,
1764:​1677-1687.

6.	

Ulloa-Aguirre A, Janovick JA, Brothers SP, Conn PM:
Pharmacologic rescue of conformationally-defective proteins: implications for the treatment of human disease.
Traffic 2004, 5:821-837.

Ringe and Petsko: Journal of Biology 2009, 8:80

80.4

7.	
8.	
9.	
10.	
11.	
12.	
13.	
14.	

15.	

16.	

17.	
18.	

19.	

Petsko GA, Ringe D: From structure to function. In Protein
Structure and Function. London; New Science Press; 2004:
56-60.
Chaudhuri TK, Paul S: Protein-misfolding diseases and
chaperone-based therapeutic approaches. FEBS J 2006,
273:1331-1349.
Loo TW, Clarke DM: Chemical and pharmacological chaperones as new therapeutic agents. Expert Rev Mol Med 2007,
9:1-18.
Sawkar AR, D’Haeze W, Kelly JW: Therapeutic strategies to
ameliorate lysosomal storage disorders - a focus on
Gaucher disease. Cell Mol Life Sci 2006, 63:1179-1192.
Sanchez-Ruiz JM: Ligand effects on protein thermodynamic
stability. Biophys Chem 2007, 126:43-49.
Fan JQ: A counterintuitive approach to treat enzyme deficiencies: use of enzyme inhibitors for restoring mutant
enzyme activity. Biol Chem 2008, 389:1-11.
Ringe D: What makes a binding site a binding site? Curr
Opin Struct Biol 1995, 5:825-829.
Mattos C, Bellamacina CR, Peisach E, Pereira A, Vitkup D,
Petsko GA, Ringe D: Multiple solvent crystal structures:
probing binding sites, plasticity and hydration. J Mol Biol
2006, 357:1471-1482.
Landon MR, Lieberman RL, Hoang QQ, Ju S, Caaveiro JM,
Orwig SD, Kozakov D, Brenke R, Chuang GY, Beglov D, Vajda
S, Petsko GA, Ringe D: Detection of ligand binding hot
spots on protein surfaces via fragment-based methods:
application to DJ-1 and glucocerebrosidase. J Comput
Aided Mol Des 2009. [Epub ahead of print]
Pey AL, Pérez B, Desviat LR, Martínez MA, Aguado C,
Erlandsen H, Gámez A, Stevens RC, Thórólfsson M, Ugarte M,
Martínez A: Mechanisms underlying responsiveness to tetrahydrobiopterin in mild phenylketonuria mutations. Hum
Mutat 2004, 24:388-399.
Amaral MD: Therapy through chaperones: sense or antisense? Cystic fibrosis as a model disease. J Inherit Metab
Dis 2006, 29:477-487.
Ozcan U, Yilmaz E, Ozcan L, Furuhashi M, Vaillancourt E,
Smith RO, Görgün CZ, Hotamisligil GS: Chemical chaperones reduce ER stress and restore glucose homeostasis
in a mouse model of type 2 diabetes. Science 2006,
313:1137-1140.
Cohen FE, Kelly JW: Therapeutic approaches to proteinmisfolding diseases. Nature 2003, 426:905-909.

http://jbiol.com/content/8/9/80	

20.	 Johnson SM, Wiseman RL, Sekijima Y, Green NS, AdamskiWerner SL, Kelly JW: Native state kinetic stabilization as a
strategy to ameliorate protein misfolding diseases: a focus
on the transthyretin amyloidoses. Acc Chem Res 2005,
38:911-921.
21. 	 Coelho T, Waddington-Cruz M, Planté-Bordeneuve V, Cros D,
Roy Grogan D, Packman J: Correlation of clinical outcomes
and disease burden in patients with transthyretin (TTR)
amyloid polyneuropathy: study Fx-005, a landmark clinical
trail of Fx-1006A, a novel small molecule TTR stabilizer. J
Neurol 2008, 255(Suppl 2):78.
22.	 Waddington-Cruz M, Coelho T, Maia L, Martins da Silva A,
Planté-Bordeneuve V, Suhr O, Campistol J, Conceiçao I,
Schmidt H, Trigo P, Cros D, Roy Grogan D, Packman J: A
landmark clinical trial of a novel small molecule transthyretin (TTR) stabilizer, Fx-1006A, in patients with TTR
amyloid polyneuropathy: a phase II/III, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. J Neurol 2008,
255(Suppl 2):107.
23.	 Grabowski GA: Treatment perspectives for the lysosomal
storage diseases. Expert Opin Emerg Drugs 2008, 13:197211.
24.	 Steet RA, Chung S, Wustman B, Powe A, Do H, Kornfeld SA:
The iminosugar isofagomine increases the activity of
N370S mutant acid beta-glucosidase in Gaucher fibroblasts by several mechanisms. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006,
103:13813-13818.
25.	 Lieberman RL, Wustman BA, Huertas P, Powe AC Jr, Pine CW,
Khanna R, Schlossmacher MG, Ringe D, Petsko GA:
Structure of acid beta-glucosidase with pharmacological
chaperone provides insight into Gaucher disease. Nat
Chem Biol 2007, 3:101-107.
26.	 Fan JQ, Ishii S: Active-site-specific chaperone therapy for
Fabry disease. Yin and Yang of enzyme inhibitors. FEBS J
2007, 274:4962-4971.
27.	 Maas C, Hermeling S, Bouma B, Jiskoot W, Gebbink MF: A
role for protein misfolding in immunogenicity of biopharmaceuticals. J Biol Chem 2007, 282:2229-2236.

Published: 13 October 2009
doi:10.1186/jbiol186
© 2009 BioMed Central Ltd

Ringe and Petsko: Journal of Biology 2009, 8:80

