Minireview

Forward genetics in Tribolium castaneum: opening new avenues
of research in arthropod biology
Andrew D Peel
Address: Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology (IMBB), Foundation for Research and Technology Hellas (FoRTH), Nikolaou
Plastira 100, GR-70013 Iraklio, Crete, Greece. Email: apeel@imbb.forth.gr

Abstract
A recent paper in BMC Biology reports the first large-scale
insertional mutagenesis screen in a non-drosophilid insect, the
red flour beetle Tribolium castaneum. This screen marks the
beginning of a non-biased, ‘forward genetics’ approach to the
study of genetic mechanisms operating in Tribolium.
See research article http://biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/7/73

Much of our understanding of the genetic mechanisms
operating in arthropods is derived from studies on the
genetically tractable, and long established, laboratory
model insect Drosophila melanogaster. However, despite
the many advantages of using the Drosophila model
system, it does have some inherent theoretical and
practical limitations. Many of the traits that predispose
Drosophila to laboratory study - for example, its small
genome and developmental traits associated with its short
generation time - are evolutionarily derived and/or atypical
of many arthropods. As such, it has long been accepted
that a greater depth of knowledge from a broader range of
arthropods is required to gain a clearer understanding of
the ancestry and evolution of arthropod developmental
mechanisms. In addition, studies on arthropod species
that exhibit morphological, physiological, behavioral or
ecological traits absent in Drosophila are often a prerequisite to address a specific theoretical question or
practical problem.
There has therefore been a pressing need to establish
reliable and efficient tools for genetic manipulation in
arthropod species that often possess larger genomes than
Drosophila, or exhibit longer and less amenable life
histories. Much progress has been made in recent years.
The advent of reverse genetic techniques, most notably
RNA interference (RNAi), has enabled the disruption of
gene function in a wide range of arthropods. The
increasing speed, and reduced cost, of DNA sequencing
has meant that complete genome sequences (and/or
expressed sequence tags, ESTs) are now available to the
research community for an ever-increasing number of
species. And now, in a paper published in BMC Biology,
Trauner et al. [1] report another significant advance: the

http://jbiol.com/content/8/12/106

first large-scale insertional mutagenesis screen in a nondrosophilid arthropod, the red flour beetle Tribolium
castaneum.
Chemical
and/or
gamma-irradiation
mutagenesis screens selecting for specific classes of
mutant phenotype have been carried out before in
Tribolium [2,3], as well as in the parasitic wasp Nasonia
vitripennis [4]. However, the insertional mutagenesis
screen reported by Trauner et al. [1] will facilitate, for the
first time in a non-drosophilid arthropod, a large-scale
and non-biased approach to the study of genetic
mechanisms underpinning a diverse range of biological
traits.

The first large-scale insertional mutagenesis
screen in a non-drosophilid arthropod
Of the non-drosophilid arthropods currently under study,
the beetle Tribolium castaneum is the most amenable to
genetic manipulation and is rapidly becoming a model
arthropod system. The Tribolium genome is fully
sequenced, well aligned and available to the research community [5]. Reverse genetics, via RNAi, is highly efficient,
being both systemic in nature and applicable to all life
stages [6]. In addition, effective protocols have been
developed for germline transformation and insertional
mutagenesis that make use of a number of different
transposable elements and dominant fluorescent marker
genes [7-10]. Trauner et al. [1] have used this existing
transgenic technology, and a strategy devised and tested
previously [8], to undertake a large-scale insertional mutagenesis screen in T. castaneum, the first in a nondrosophilid arthropod.
The chemical and gamma-irradiation mutagenesis screens
carried out previously in Tribolium identified many
mutants that proved informative with respect to specific
processes, such as the genetic mechanisms controlling the
development and diversification of body segments [2,3].
However, the absence of dominant markers, coupled with
insufficient balancer chromosomes (there is currently less
than 40% genome coverage), made the characterization
and maintenance of recessive mutants difficult on the scale
necessary for large non-biased screens. The insertional
mutagenesis screen carried out by Trauner et al. [1] has

Peel: Journal of Biology 2009, 8:106

106.2

four important features that confer practicality of use on a
large scale.
Donor and helper strains
By using two distinct transposons to establish stable
‘donor’ and ‘helper’ strains, the need for repetitive - and
less efficient - egg injections to create new transgenic lines
was avoided [8]. The donor strain carries the transposon
(in this case derived from the lepidopteran piggyBac
element) that is remobilized to produce new insertions,
whereas the helper (or ‘jumpstarter’) strain carries the
stably integrated source of transposase that is necessary to
catalyze these remobilization events (in this case the Minos
transposable element was used to stably integrate a source
of piggyBac transposase). New transgenic lines were
established simply by crossing the donor and helper
strains, such that the piggyBac transposon and transposase were present in the same individual. The resulting
new transposon insertions were then stabilized in the next
generation by segregating away the helper element (that is,
the piggyBac transposase).
Dominant fluorescent markers
Efficient identification of new transgenic lines and their
subsequent stabilization and maintenance was achieved by
using dominant fluorescent markers. Hybrid beetles competent for germline remobilization of the donor element
were identified by their red and green fluorescent eyes,
which resulted from the expression of enhanced green
fluorescent protein (EGFP) from the piggyBac donor
element and DsRed from the helper element. The fact that
the 3xP3 universal promoter used to drive this eyerestricted expression has enhancer-trapping capabilities
was exploited to identify those beetles in which remobilization of the donor element had actually occurred [7]. A
donor strain was chosen in which the donor element is
integrated into the 3’ untranslated region of an actin gene
[8], resulting in expression of EGFP in muscle tissue as
well as in the eyes; in individuals where the donor element
is remobilized away from this actin gene the green
fluorescence in muscles is lost. Thus individual F1 beetles
that retained green eye fluorescence but lacked green
muscle fluorescence and red eye fluorescence could be
easily selected to found new and stable transgenic lines.
An optimized crossing scheme to identify new
recessive mutant lines
Although by far the most laborious phase of the screen,
Trauner et al. [1] devised a crossing scheme for the identification of recessive mutant lines that did not require
balancer chromosomes, that minimized the number of
false positives while practically eliminating the chances of
false negatives (that is, discarding true recessive mutant
lines), and that still identified sufficient numbers of
homozygous lethal, semi-lethal and sterile lines to make
the screen worthwhile (see below and [1]).

http://jbiol.com/content/8/12/106

Simple identification of affected genes
Mutagenesis via the physical insertion of a transposon,
when combined with a fully sequenced genome [5], makes
identification of the affected gene or genes relatively
simple. Genomic sequence flanking the inserted transposon was obtained using a suite of PCR-based methods,
with subsequent BLAST analysis usually identifying
around the site of insertion a small number of candidates
for the gene mutated or trapped.
Using this scheme, Trauner et al. [1] were able to generate
and analyze more than 6,500 new piggyBac insertion
lines, which identified 421 embryonic recessive lethal
insertions, 75 embryonic recessive semi-lethal insertions
and 8 recessive sterile insertions. This rate of generating
recessive lethal mutations in T. castaneum was on a par
with comparable insertional mutagenesis screens carried
out previously in Drosophila. Of particular importance,
embryonic homozygous lethal mutations exhibited a
range of phenotypes in both morphological space and
developmental time. Encouragingly, insertions within
introns in two genes that have already been well studied Tc-Krüppel and Tc-maxillopedia - recapitulated, at least
in part, the knockdown phenotypes previously generated
by RNAi [1,8].
The authors estimated that using this scheme one person
could establish 150 recessive lethal strains in one year.
While not yet efficient enough to attempt genome saturation, this number should increase with improvements to
the mutating potential of donor elements (for example, via
the use of insulator sequences or splice acceptor sites) and/
or the introduction of dominant marking systems that will
allow the simultaneous determination of sex and
identification of new insertions (for details see [1]). The
screen also identified 505 lines exhibiting new enhancertrap patterns, which will be directly informative with
respect to the developmental mechanisms operating in
Tribolium.
Analysis of the chromosomal locations of 403 of the
piggyBac insertions revealed that with the exception of a
bias for reinsertion near the site of mobilization, insertions
were well distributed throughout the Tribolium genome.
As a result, the large number of embryonic recessive lethal
and enhancer-trap lines generated by this and future
screens will for the first time enable a non-biased approach
to the study of Tribolium genetics.

The advantage of a non-biased genetic
approach to the study of arthropod biology
The study of genetic mechanisms in most arthropods has
been restricted to examining the homologs of genes with
well-characterized roles in the experimentally amenable,
but evolutionarily derived, fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster.
This ‘candidate gene approach’ has proved informative.

Peel: Journal of Biology 2009, 8:106

106.3

For example, it has revealed that developmental genes are
broadly conserved across phylogenetically widespread and
morphologically diverse arthropod species. It has
suggested that the changes underpinning diversifications
in arthropod morphology have occurred as much, if not
more, via the ‘rewiring’ of existing genetic networks, and
through the cooption of existing genes into new roles, than
by the emergence of entirely novel genes.
However, the candidate gene approach has significant
limitations. It overlooks those genes whose functions are not
yet characterized in Drosophila, genes that obtained novel
roles in the lineages leading to non-drosophilid species, as
well as the fraction of genes that lost their ancestral roles (or
were lost all together) in the lineage leading to Drosophila.
Indeed, genome comparisons reveal that there are
thousands of genes in both Drosophila and Tribolium that
currently appear species specific (that is, no cross-species
sequence similarity can be identified) [5]. This implies the
existence of a significant number of novel genes, or genes
that have diversified in function between the lineages,
perhaps many of these associated with species-specific
traits. Genome comparisons also show that in each lineage a
small, but significant, number of ancestral gene families - as
determined by their presence in other arthropod and
vertebrate genomes - have been lost altogether [5].
An example of a gene that might have been overlooked by
following a purely candidate gene approach is the
Tribolium developmental gene mille-pattes [11]. An
important role in Tribolium thoracic and abdominal
segmentation for this highly unusual gene - four small
peptides are translated from its polycistronic transcript was revealed by its appearance in an EST expression screen
[11] (an alternative non-biased genetic resource available
in Tribolium). A homologous gene, called tarsal-less (tal),
is present in Drosophila. Although tal is expressed in a
segmental pattern, tal mutants do not show any
segmentation or homeotic phenotypes [12], and thus millepattes would not have been an obvious candidate for a role
in Tribolium segmentation [12].
Many similar examples will no doubt arise as the lines
established by Trauner et al. [1] are closely examined by
the Tribolium research community: information on these
lines can be found at the GEKU database [13], and all lines
are freely available on request. Indeed, the first study using
a line from this screen has already appeared in print.
Kittelmann et al. [14] examined the new enhancer traps for
lines exhibiting expression of EGFP in thoracic legs. The
subsequent analysis of one such line identified a role for
the Tribolium homolog of the Drosophila gene zinc finger
homeodomain 2 (zfh2) in distal leg development as well as
leg segmentation [14]. Once again, a purely candidate gene
approach could not have led to this finding, as Drosophila
zfh2 has no reported role in leg development [14].

http://jbiol.com/content/8/12/106

Future developments in Tribolium and beyond
The ectopic misexpression of genes can offer important
insights on function that complement data derived from
RNAi knockdown experiments. With the generation of a
large number of enhancer-trap lines, an ability to
conditionally misexpress genes in temporally and spatially
restricted domains in Tribolium draws nearer. This could
potentially be achieved by engineering donor elements to
be competent in site-specific recombination: the sitespecific integration system from phage phiC31 has already
been used successfully to modify existing transgenic lines
in Drosophila and in the Mediterranean fruit fly Ceratitis
capitata [15,16]. This strategy would use a stably integrated
enhancer-trapping donor element as a ‘landing pad’ for the
site-specific integration of a gene construct whose
transcription would then come under the control of the
same enhancer(s) driving the original enhancer trap EGFP
expression pattern. If the development of binary
expression systems - such as the yeast-derived GAL4/UAS
system widely used in Drosophila - proves successful in
Tribolium, such a strategy could be used to establish a
variety of stable (GAL4) driver lines, that could then be
crossed to transgenic (UAS) effector lines in order to
temporally and or spatially misexpress genes.
As all the genetic components used are species nonspecific,
large-scale insertional mutagenesis screens analogous with
that carried out by Trauner et al. [1] can potentially be
extended to other arthropods in which large-scale crossing
schemes and the maintenance of transgenic lines is
feasible. Indeed, significant progress towards this end is
currently being made in the amphipod crustacean
Parhyale hawaiensis, in which transgenic methods have
already been used to conditionally misexpress the homeotic gene Ultrabithorax ([17] and M Averof, personal
communication). The establishment of a number of
additional model arthropod systems that are amenable to
genetic manipulation promises to open many new avenues
of research. The advent of forward genetics in Tribolium
signals the start of a new and exciting phase in the study of
arthropod biology.

Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Z Kontarakis and M Averof for their helpful
comments on the manuscript.

References
1.

2.

3.

Trauner J, Schinko J, Lorenzen MD, Shippy TD, Wimmer EA,
Beeman RW, Klingler M, Bucher G, Brown SJ: Large-scale
insertional mutagenesis of a coleopteran stored grain
pest, the red flour beetle Tribolium castaneum, identifies
embryonic lethal mutations and enhancer traps. BMC Biol
2009, 7:73.
Beeman RW, Stuart JJ, Haas MS, Denell RE: Genetic analysis of the homeotic gene complex (HOM-C) in the beetle
Tribolium castaneum. Dev Biol 1989, 133:196-209.
Sulston IA, Anderson KV: Embryonic patterning mutants of
Tribolium castaneum. Development 1996, 122:805-814.

Peel: Journal of Biology 2009, 8:106

106.4

4.

Pultz MA, Zimmerman KK, Alto NM, Kaeberlein M, Lange SK,
Pitt JN, Reeves NL, Zehrung DL: A genetic screen for zygotic
embryonic lethal mutations affecting cuticular morphology
in the wasp Nasonia vitripennis. Genetics 2000, 154:12131229.
5. Tribolium Genome Sequencing Consortium, Richards S, Gibbs
RA, Weinstock GM, Brown SJ, Denell R, Beeman RW, Gibbs
R, Beeman RW, Brown SJ, Bucher G, Friedrich M,
Grimmelikhuijzen CJ, Klingler M, Lorenzen M, Richards S,
Roth S, Schröder R, Tautz D, Zdobnov EM, Muzny D, Gibbs
RA, Weinstock GM, Attaway T, Bell S, Buhay CJ, Chandrabose
MN, Chavez D, Clerk-Blankenburg KP, Cree A, Dao M, et al.:
The genome of the model beetle and pest Tribolium castaneum. Nature 2008, 452:949-955.
6. Tomoyasu Y, Miller SC, Tomita S, Schoppmeier M, Grossmann
D, Bucher G: Exploring systemic RNA interference in
insects: a genome-wide survey for RNAi genes in
Tribolium. Genome Biol 2008, 9:R10.
7. Horn C, Schmid BG, Pogoda FS, Wimmer EA: Fluorescent
transformation markers for insect transgenesis. Insect
Biochem Mol Biol 2002, 32:1221-1235.
8. Lorenzen MD, Kimzey T, Shippy TD, Brown SJ, Denell RE,
Beeman RW: piggyBac-based insertional mutagenesis in
Tribolium castaneum using donor/helper hybrids. Insect
Mol Biol 2007, 16:265-275.
9. Pavlopoulos A, Berghammer AJ, Averof M, Klingler M: Efficient
transformation of the beetle Tribolium castaneum using
the Minos transposable element: quantitative and qualitative analysis of genomic integration events. Genetics 2004,
167:737-746.
10. Berghammer AJ, Klingler M, Wimmer EA: A universal marker
for transgenic insects. Nature 1999, 402:370-371.
11. Savard J, Marques-Souza H, Aranda M, Tautz D: A segmentation gene in Tribolium produces a polycistronic mRNA that

http://jbiol.com/content/8/12/106

12.

13.
14.

15.

16.

17.

codes for multiple conserved peptides. Cell 2006, 126:559569.
Galindo MI, Pueyo JI, Fouix S, Bishop SA, Couso JP: Peptides
encoded by short ORFs control development and define a
new eukaryotic gene family. PLoS Biol 2007, 5:e106.
GEKU [http://www.geku-base.uni-goettingen.de]
Kittelmann M, Schinko JB, Winkler M, Bucher G, Wimmer EA,
Prpic NM: Insertional mutagenesis screening identifies the
zinc finger homeodomain 2 (zfh2) gene as a novel factor
required for embryonic leg development in Tribolium castaneum. Dev Genes Evol 2009. doi: 10.1007/s00427-0090303-y
Schetelig MF, Scolari F, Handler AM, Kittelmann S, Gasperi G,
Wimmer EA: Site-specific recombination for the modification of transgenic strains of the Mediterranean fruit fly
Ceratitis capitata. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:1817118176.
Fish MP, Groth AC, Calos MP, Nusse R: Creating transgenic
Drosophila by microinjecting the site-specific phiC31 integrase mRNA and a transgene-containing donor plasmid.
Nat Protoc 2007, 2:2325-2331.
Pavlopoulos A, Kontarakis Z, Liubicich DM, Serano JM, Akam
M, Patel NH, Averof M: Probing the evolution of appendage
specialization by Hox gene misexpression in an emerging
model crustacean. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:1389713902.

Published: 30 December 2009
doi:10.1186/jbiol208
© 2009 BioMed Central Ltd

Peel: Journal of Biology 2009, 8:106

