Mehta et al. Journal of Biology 2010, 9:3
http://jbiol.com/content/9/1/3

MINIREVIEW

Sometimes one just isn’t enough: do vertebrates
contain an H2A.Z hyper-variant?
Monika Mehta¤, Hyun-Soo Kim¤ and Michael-Christopher Keogh*
See research articles http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/7/86 and http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/9/31

Abstract
How much functional specialization can one
component histone confer on a single nucleosome?
The histone variant H2A.Z seems to be an extreme
example. Genome-wide distribution maps show
non-random (and evolutionarily conserved) patterns,
with localized enrichment or depletion giving a
tantalizing suggestion of function. Multiple posttranslational modifications on the protein indicate
further regulation. An additional layer of complexity
has now been uncovered: the vertebrate form is
actually encoded by two non-allelic genes that differ
by expression pattern and three amino acids.

All species have to perform a balancing act with their
genome: cram it into the cell (in the case of eukaryotes, a
small part of that cell: for example, about 2 m of human
DNA in a nucleus of about 5 μm diameter) yet make the
appropriate regions readily available for replication and
expression (and repair if something goes wrong).
Eukaryotes achieve this feat by wrapping their DNA into
chromatin, a highly ordered complex with a simple
repeating unit of about 146 bp DNA plus eight histone
proteins, termed the nucleosome. This beads-on-a-string
array is further assembled into a variety of higher-order
structures all the way up to the metaphase chromosome.
The chromatin ﬁeld exploded with the discovery that the
monotonous-looking nucleosomes are actually hugely
variable, with post-translational modiﬁcations of numerous residues on the major histones, their substitution for
histone
variants,
and
even
post-translational
modiﬁcations of the variants. Furthermore, the highly
¤
These authors contributed equally to this work.
*Correspondence: michael.keogh@einstein.yu.edu
Department of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York, NY
10461, USA

© 2010 BioMed Central Ltd

© 2010 BioMed Central Ltd

regulated use of these marks serves to distinguish regions
of DNA (such as promoters, centromeres or damaged
DNA) to the appropriate enzymatic machineries.
Histone variants are non-allelic isoforms of the
canonical histones that can be assembled into nucleosomes in their place, and are thought thereby to provide
the basis for regulation of biological processes that
require local access to DNA. In contrast to the S-phasecoupled synthesis of the major histones (timing availability to the peak demand of genome replication),
variants are generally expressed throughout the cell cycle.
Histone H2A has one of the largest variant families, and
includes H2A.Z, a protein that is highly conserved across
eukaryotes but diﬀers considerably from the major H2A
in each species (Figure 1) [1]. H2A.Z has been ascribed a
large number of roles, including most recently suppressing antisense RNAs [2] and stabilizing the association of
condensin with mitotic chromosomes [3]. Although we
still have a poor understanding of how the variant
mediates any speciﬁc function, it is likely that diﬀerential
enrichment at speciﬁc locations and distinct post-translational modiﬁcations contribute. H2A.Z at the inactive
X chromosome of mammalian female cells is monoubiquitinated [4], that in budding yeast (Saccharomyces
cerevisiae) is sumoylated [5], and in all tested species it is
subject to multiple amino-terminal acetylations (Figure 1),
primarily by the Kat5 family of acetyltransferases [1,3].
Mutation of the S. cerevisiae sumoylation sites impairs
movement of DNA double-strand breaks to the nuclear
periphery [5], whereas an unacetylatable allele in ﬁssion
yeast (Schizosaccharomyces pombe) recapitulates many of
the phenotypes of a complete deletion [3]. However, it is
still unknown whether the eﬀect of any of these
modiﬁcations is direct (such as steric hindrance or charge
modulation inﬂuencing the formation of higher-order
structures) or indirect (such as generating sites for the
recruitment of regulatory proteins).

The impact of H2A.Z on individual nucleosomes
The major route for H2A.Z into chromatin is via Swr1,
the Snf2-family ATPase at the catalytic center of the SWR

Mehta et al. Journal of Biology 2010, 9:3
http://jbiol.com/content/9/1/3

Page 2 of 3

H2A.Z vs H2A.Z
H2A.Z vs H2A
NLS / Nap1 binding site

Specific binding to
SWR-C

Histone fold

Sc Htz1
αN
H2A.Z-1
H2A.Z-2

α1

α2

AGGKAGKDSGKAK T KAVSR SQRA GLQFP VGRIHRHLK S RTTSHGRVGA
A

Most divergence across H2A.Zs

α3

TAAVYSAAILEYLTAEVLELAGNASKDL

KVKRIT

αC

PRHLQLAIR GDE ELDSLI

KATIAGGGVIPHIHKSLIGKKGQQKT V

A

T

Loop1
H2A/H2A self
interaction domain

Loop2
Interaction with
nucleosomal DNA

Docking domain
Interaction
with H3/H4

Major divergence from H2A
Acetylation

Ubiquitination

Sumoylation

Figure 1. A simplified view of H2A.Z structure and post-translational modifications. Bars indicate the major regions of divergence between
H2A.Z proteins across species (green) and between H2A.Z and H2A (blue). The relative location of the nuclear localization signal (NLS) and regions
of S. cerevisiae (Sc) H2A.Z (called Htz1) that mediate contact with the Nap1 chaperone and the SWR-complex (SWR-C) ATPase complex are also
shown. All H2A.Z post-translational modifications identified so far are on the relatively divergent amino and carboxyl termini, so it is unclear
whether each specific modification is invariably used to regulate variant function across species. Addition of post-translational modifications
generally depends on the SWR complex, indicating that each modification occurs after the variant is assembled into chromatin [3,5]. A major region
of difference between H2A and H2A.Z is in the Loop 1 domain, which regulates interaction between the two H2A molecules in a nucleosome. This
has led to the suggestion that nucleosome core particles can only be homotypic, containing either H2A or H2A.Z. However, hybrid nucleosomes
containing H2A:H2B and H2A.Z:H2B dimers have been observed [6]. The sequence of human H2A.Z-1, including the three residues that differ in
H2A.Z-2, is also indicated.

chromatin remodeling complex. This is certainly the case
in S. cerevisiae (Swr1), S. pombe (Swr1), humans (SRCAP),
Drosophila (Domino) and Arabidopsis (PIE1) [2,3,6-8].
The presence of H2A.Z in a nucleosome facilitates intramolecular folding to higher-order arrays, particularly 30
nm chromatin ﬁbers, although these resist the formation
of more highly condensed structures resulting from intermolecular association [6]. H2A.Z has also been reported
to have a subtle destabilizing eﬀect on the nucleosome in
which it is incorporated, although this has been disputed.
The apparent contradictions in the data can however be
reconciled if the total histone composition of a nucleosome octamer is considered: variants seem to subtly alter
nucleosome stability, so the order of stability is H3/
H2A.Z = H3/H2A > H3.3/H2A > H3.3/H2A.Z [9]. Furthermore, although it was originally predicted that H2A.Z
was unlikely to form hybrid nucleosomes (Figure 1), both
homotypic (containing two H2A.Z:H2B dimers) and
heterotypic (containing H2A:H2B and H2A.Z:H2B dimers)
forms have been observed, adding yet another level of
structural (and possibly functional) heterogeneity [6,10].

Genome distribution maps of H2A.Z are suggestive
of function
High density maps of H2A.Z across genomes as diverse
as S. cerevisiae [6], S. pombe [8], Arabidopsis thaliana [7]
and Caenorhabditis elegans [2] show the variant to be
widely but non-randomly distributed. In budding yeast

H2A.Z occupancy peaks in the single nucleosomes
directly ﬂanking (-1/+1) a nucleosome-free region over
promoters, a pattern apparently induced by the nucleosome-free region itself [6]. Fission yeast, in contrast,
shows enrichment in the +1 but not the -1 nucleosome
around the nucleosome-free region [8]. The reason for
(or outcome of ) this diﬀerence is unknown, although in
each organism enrichment depends on the SWR complex
and is inversely correlated with transcriptional activity.
H2A.Z has been linked to both transcriptional activation
and repression at various genes, although consensus
seems to be building towards a role in marking and/or
poising promoters for expression. The presence of H2A.Z
might commit local chromatin to a state competent for
activation by other factors or, in higher eukaryotes, it
might protect the region from inactivating DNA
methylation [7]. Or it might be that the cell uses the
inherent instability of H2A.Z-containing nucleosomes to
regulate promoter accessibility.

H2A.Z is found in ‘hot’ nucleosomes at promoters
and euchromatin-heterochromatin boundaries
Studies on the dynamics of replication-independent
histone turnover in budding yeast suggest that H2A.Zcontaining nucleosomes have signiﬁcantly higher turnover rates [6]. This ‘hotness’ of the nucleosomes around
transcription start sites could aid promoter function by
making it easier to expose these DNA elements to the

Mehta et al. Journal of Biology 2010, 9:3
http://jbiol.com/content/9/1/3

transcriptional machinery. Such rapid ﬂux might also
abrogate the spread of a propagating domain (such as
that of the budding yeast Sir2 deacetylase complex),
which could explain how H2A.Z mediates a heterochromatin-euchromatin boundary function in this
organism [6]. H2A.Z enrichment at the regions between
euchromatin and heterochromatin is a feature also found
in other organisms, despite the dramatic biochemical
diﬀerences between the heterochromatin of budding
yeast and that of many other species. In this manner the
mammalian variant is a component of pericentric
heterochromatin and ﬂanks sites occupied by the
insulator binding protein CTCF [6,11].

A vertebrate H2A.Z hyper-variant
As if the complexity described above wasn’t enough,
recent mass spectrometry analyses of chicken erythrocytes identiﬁed two forms of H2A.Z that diﬀer by just
three amino acids: H2A.Z-1 (previously H2A.Z) and
H2A.Z-2 (previously H2A.F/Z or H2A.V) (Figure 1) [11].
These proteins are encoded by two non-allelic genes,
which phylogenetic analyses indicate are present in all
vertebrates and have a common origin early in chordate
evolution [12]. Both isoforms are incorporated into
chromatin, and both seem to be acetylated on the same
three lysine residues within the amino terminus (Lys4,
Lys7 and Lys11) to a similar degree (Figure 1) [11].
Why would vertebrates need two copies of a protein
that diﬀer by just three amino acids, whereas invertebrates do just ﬁne with just one? Mouse studies ostensibly
showing that H2A.Z is indispensable deleted only
H2A.Z-1, indicating non-redundancy: that is, H2A.Z-2
cannot compensate. At this stage, we can only speculate
about the relevance of each isoform. The three-aminoacid diﬀerence is not expected to have any major
structural implication for nucleosomes [12]. The H2A.Z
isoforms could have a diﬀerential aﬃnity for various
chaperones and/or deposition machineries, which could
explain their subtly diﬀerent chromatin occupancy
patterns [11]. Although this might sound unlikely, there
is a comparable precedent: three of the four amino acids
that diﬀer between histones H3.1 and H3.3 regulate the
usage of the respective proteins in the replicationdependent and -independent deposition pathways [13].
However, the most important diﬀerence between
H2A.Z-1 and H2A.Z-2 may be their highly divergent
promoter sequences [11]. This opens up the possibility of
dramatically diﬀerent temporal and/or spatial expression
patterns for the two isoforms. Indeed, preliminary studies
suggest some diﬀerences in mRNA expression levels
depending on the developmental stage of a variety of
tissues [11].

Page 3 of 3

Plants also have multiple H2A.Z isoforms. Three have
been reported in A. thaliana - HTA8, HTA9 and HTA11 which share about 90% identity but have distinct
expression patterns, with HTA9 alone being cell-cycleindependent [7]. PIE1 (the plant homolog of Swr1)
interacts with all three variants, but not with H2A. Single
knockouts have no distinct phenotypes, but double hta9/
hta11 knockouts show developmental abnormalities. It
remains to be seen whether these variants of the variant
have any tissue or developmental function [7]. However,
the parallel with vertebrates is striking and may suggest
that more complex organisms need more ﬁnely tuned
chromatin than one H2A.Z can provide.
Published: 21 January 2010
References
1. Thambirajah AA, Ishibashi T, Ausio J: New developments in posttranslational modiﬁcations and functions of histone H2A variants. Biochem
Cell Biol 2009, 87:7-17.
2. Zofall M, Fischer T, Zhang K, Zhou M, Cui B, Veenstra TD, Grewal SI: Histone
H2A.Z cooperates with RNAi and heterochromatin factors to suppress
antisense RNAs. Nature 2009, 461:419-422.
3. Kim HS, Vanoosthuyse V, Fillingham J, Roguev A, Watt S, Kislinger T, Treyer A,
Carpenter LR, Bennett CS, Emili A, Greenblatt JF, Hardwick KG, Krogan NJ,
Bähler J, Keogh MC: An acetylated form of histone H2A.Z regulates
chromosome architecture in Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Nat Struct Mol
Biol 2009, 16:1286-1293.
4. Sarcinella E, Zuzarte PC, Lau PN, Draker R, Cheung P: Monoubiquitylation of
H2A.Z distinguishes its association with euchromatin or facultative
heterochromatin. Mol Cell Biol 2007, 27:6457-6486.
5. Kalocsay M, Hiller NJ, Jentsch S: Chromosome wide Rad51 spreading and
SUMO-H2A.Z-dependent chromosome ﬁxation in response to a persistent
DNA double-strand break. Mol Cell 2009, 33:335-343.
6. Zlatanova J, Thakar A: H2A.Z: view from the top. Structure 2008, 16:166-179.
7. March-Díaz R, Reyes JC: The beauty of being a variant: H2A.Z and the SWR1
complex in plants. Mol Plant 2009, 2:565-577.
8. Buchanan L, Durand-Dubief M, Roguev A, Sakalar C, Wilhelm B, Strålfors A,
Shevchenko A, Aasland R, Shevchenko A, Ekwall K, Francis Stewart A: The
Schizosaccharomyces pombe JmjC-protein, Msc1, prevents H2A.Z
localization in centromeric and subtelomeric chromatin domains. PLoS
Genetics 2009, 5:e1000726.
9. Jin C, Felsenfeld G: Nucleosome stability mediated by histone variants H3.3
and H2A.Z. Genes Dev 2007, 21:1519-1529.
10. Ishibashi T, Dryhurst D, Rose KL, Shabanowitz J, Hunt DF, Ausió J: Acetylation
of vertebrate H2A.Z and its eﬀect on the structure of the nucleosome.
Biochemistry 2009, 48:5007-5017.
11. Dryhurst D, Ishibashi T, Rose KL, Eirín-López JM, McDonald D, Silva-Moreno B,
Veldhoen N, Helbing C, C, Hendzel MJ, Shabanowitz J, Hunt DF, Ausio J:
Characterization of the histone H2A.Z-1 and H2A.Z-2 isoforms in
vertebrates. BMC Biol 2009, 7:86.
12. Eirín-López JM, González-Romero R, Dryhurst D, Ishibashi T, Ausió J: The
evolutionary diﬀerentiation of two histone H2A.Z variants in chordates
(H2A.Z-1 and H2A.Z-2) is mediated by a stepwise mutation process that
aﬀects three amino acid residues. BMC Evol Biol 2009, 9:31.
13. Ahmad K, Henikoff S: The histone variant H3.3 marks active chromatin by
replication-independent nucleosome assembly. Mol Cell 2002, 9:1191-1200.

doi:10.1186/jbiol214
Cite this article as: Mehta M, et al.: Sometimes one just isn’t enough: do
vertebrates contain an H2A.Z hyper-variant? Journal of Biology 2010, 9:3.

