Whited and Tabin Journal of Biology 2010, 9:15
http://jbiol.com/content/9/2/15

MINIREVIEW

Regeneration review reprise
Jessica L Whited and Clifford J Tabin*
See research articles http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/7/83 and http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/5

Abstract
There have been notable advances in the scientific
understanding of regeneration within the past year
alone, including two recently published in BMC Biology.
Increasingly, progress in the regeneration field is being
inspired by comparisons with stem cell biology and
enabled by newly developed techniques that allow
simultaneous examination of thousands of genes and
proteins.

Regeneration of complex structures such as appendages
has long fascinated and perplexed biologists. Historically,
understanding regeneration has been approached, often
to great effect, through surgical operations, grafting,
dissections, and other tools borrowed from
embryologists. More recently, additional insights have
been gleaned through analyzing appendage development
genes during regeneration. Now, rather than simply
investigating the potential roles of genes already known
to be important in the context of the embryonic
development of a structure, researchers are using modern
techniques to interrogate gene transcription and protein
translation during various stages of regeneration itself
[1-4]. In addition, new clues are being drawn from other
areas of biology to tackle longstanding regeneration
questions [1,2,5].
A year ago we [6] provided a general outline of the
morphological events accompanying limb regeneration
and a summary of the classical experiments that provided
some of the most salient principles of regeneration; these
aspects are therefore not extensively reviewed here.
Instead, the focus is on what has been learned within the
past year and what discoveries might be awaiting fresh
perspectives and tools on the horizon.

*Correspondence: tabin@genetics.med.harvard.edu
Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur,
NRB 360, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
© 2010 BioMed Central Ltd

© 2010 BioMed Central Ltd

The cellular origin of the blastema and the lineage
of regenerating cells
From the early days of regeneration study, a major goal
has been to characterize the cellular and molecular
nature of blastema cells. The blastema is the structure
that develops at the cut end of an amputated limb in
some vertebrates, from which the limb regenerates. Great
debate has ensued over where these cells come from, that
is, from which tissues they arise. In salamanders, a
favorite method has been to create chimeric animals in
which a population of cells from a donor, distinguishable
in some way, is introduced into a host. The donor cells
are followed over the course of regeneration. 2009 saw
the publication of a lineage study of the regenerating
salamander limb using the most sophisticated labeling
method yet, transgenesis [7]. Cells from transgenic
animals expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP) were
transplanted into non-GFP-expressing host embryos. The
chimeras were allowed to develop, their limbs were
amputated, and the journeys of GFP-expressing cells
through the blastema and out into the new limb were
documented. The analysis revealed very little
transdifferentiation between cell types, although not all
cell types could be analyzed in this manner for technical
reasons. This study [7] suggested that the blastema is not
a homogeneous population of molecularly identical cells
but is instead heterogeneous from its inception, a
conclusion that challenges the notion that complete
dedifferentiation is a major force behind blastema
creation (Figure 1). Instead, a new model has emerged in
which some amount of dedifferentiation occurs – but
perhaps only enough to send cells ‘backwards in time’ yet
not enough to make them completely naïve. At minimum,
there seem to be two distinct cell populations in the
blastema giving rise, respectively, to muscle and nonmuscle tissue (cartilage, fibroblasts, and connective
tissue), a situation at least analogous to that found in the
early developing limb bud [7].
New ways of comparing regeneration with other
biological processes
Parallels can be drawn between blastema cells and stem
cells. Although blastema cells are like stem cells insofar as

Whited and Tabin Journal of Biology 2010, 9:15
http://jbiol.com/content/9/2/15

Page 2 of 3

Figure 1. The limbs of amphibians (left) and the fins of zebrafish (middle) both regenerate when amputated (right). Recent work in
salamanders [1] has uncovered some similarities between cells undergoing regeneration and stem cells. In zebrafish [5], histone methylation/
demethylation may have a key role in controlling gene expression during fin regeneration.

they alone can replace an entire structure, the recent
lineage data might suggest that blastema cells share
attributes with stem cells but that any individual blastema
cell is not pluripotent for replacing the lost limb. Recently,
a protocol for creating pluripotent stem cells (induced
pluripotent stem cells, iPSCs) from differentiated cells,
through the expression of just a handful of genes, has been
developed [8]. A blastema cell might be predicted to be
molecularly similar to a cell somewhere along this
trajectory of being driven into a more undifferentiated
state even if it never really becomes completely pluripotent
(and thus would more properly be referred to as a
multipotent progenitor cell than a stem cell).
Two studies have considered this hypothesis. Maki et al.
[1] found the expression of three of the core iPSC genes –
Sox2, Klf4, and c-myc – to be upregulated in regenerating
newt lens and limb. Christen et al. [2] explored the
concept of blastema cells behaving as cells on the iPSC
trajectory. In regenerating zebrafish fins, homologs of
genes associated with acquisition of pluripotency were
found to be expressed. Further experimentation revealed
that a few of these genes are even necessary for
regeneration to occur. However, not all of the ‘stem cell
genes’ analyzed were expressed at appreciable levels in
regenerating tissues, and many showed much higher
levels of expression in the tissues that are thought to
approximate embryonic stem cells from the relevant
species. Among blastema cells, ‘pluripotent embryonic
reference cells’ (from the same species), and iPSCs
(created in vitro), the pluripotent embryonic reference
cells and the iPSCs probably have more in common from
a gene expression standpoint than blastema cells have to
either of them. Perhaps this is not unexpected because we
know the pluripotent embryonic reference cells and the
iPSCs have more developmental potential than the
blastema cells, that is, a blastema cell does not naturally

replace an entire organism, while a whole mouse can be
cloned from an iPSC.
Another issue is that when dissecting a tissue to use as
the zero-hour time point in the zebrafish experiments,
there is the possibility of recovering some actual stem
cells among the tissue harvested. There exists the
possibility that regeneration of appendages is supported
at least in part by a local population of stem cells. If some
stem cells are among the cells in the sample, they may be
contributing to the high levels of expression of some ‘stem
cell genes’ in the intact tissue.
Approximating loss-of-function of two of the ‘stem cell
genes’ (pou and sox2) using morpholino oligonucleotides
caused impaired regeneration in tail fins; and yet, these
genes are among those expressed in intact tail fins at levels
on a par with or higher than those found in blastemas.
The authors [2] conclude that blastema cells in zebrafish
fins and Xenopus limbs are not completely analogous to
induced pluripotent mammalian stem cells but they share
some similarities in gene expression. Perhaps organisms
capable of epimorphic regeneration maintain expression
of pluripotency factors in otherwise differentiated tissue
as a way to ready themselves to regenerate should the
need arise.
Another similarity between embryonic stem cells and
cells undergoing regeneration relates to the epigenetic
status of their chromatin. A recent study of zebrafish tail
fins [5] (Figure 1) identified targets of histone methylases,
and among these targets were the promoters of many key
patterning genes expressed during regeneration. Like
embryonic stem cells, cells capable of undergoing
epimorphic regeneration might use these histone
modifications to keep cells in a poised state whereby they
can easily turn ‘on’ or ‘off’ the expression of key genes. For
example, repressive chromatin modifications seem to be
removed from the promoters of genes required during fin

Whited and Tabin Journal of Biology 2010, 9:15
http://jbiol.com/content/9/2/15

regeneration, allowing their expression. Given that many
of the required genes are targets of the same methylases
and demethylases, modulating the expression or activity
of the methylases or demethylases themselves could be an
efficient means of controlling a whole suite of regeneration
genes. Indeed, loss of one of the demethylases (Kdm6b.1)
results in inhibition of tail regeneration, perhaps because
the promoter for one of its targets (dlx4a, a homeobox
gene whose family members are involved in appendage
development across many taxa) cannot be activated [5].

Looking directly at regeneration
Another way to gain insight into regenerative processes is
to simply ask which genes are active and which proteins
are made, rather than selecting candidates for study on
the basis of roles in potentially related processes. This
type of unbiased approach to characterizing protein
composition in regenerating Xenopus tadpole limb,
performed by King, Neff, and Mescher [3], uncovered
upregulation of immune system proteins and stem cell
proteins. Another proteomics study, performed by Rao
and colleagues [4], revealed potential roles for previously
unimplicated protein networks in axolotl limb
regeneration. For example, a change in cytosolic Ca2+
levels might be one of the earliest cellular events
following amputation, as evidenced by the upregulation
of an enzyme required for the synthesis of a precursor to
the inositol triphosphate/diacylglycerol signaling
pathway, which modulates cytosolic Ca2+ stores. Another
signaling pathway that may have an important role
immediately after amputation is the nitric oxide (NO)
signaling pathway – the enzyme that synthesizes NO,
NOS1, was upregulated more than any other identified
protein at 1 day after amputation. Although almost
nothing is known about a potential role for NO signaling
in limb regeneration, the fact that the nitric oxide
synthase (NOS1) peptide was found in this study [4] is
satisfying, because a previous study had found the gene
encoding it to be upregulated in Xenopus limb buds at a
stage supportive of regeneration but not at a stage when
regeneration could not occur [9]. These two, and other,
pathways implicated in this proteomic study [4] can serve
as pointers for future functional studies.
A new perspective on amphibian and mammalian
regeneration
The de novo approach to understanding limb
regeneration led to the identification of a proximallydistally graded cell-surface protein, Prod1, and eventually
its ligand, the newt Anterior gradient protein, in the past
decade. Last year the Prod1 crystal structure was solved
[10] and a surprising conclusion was reached: the protein

Page 3 of 3

is not homologous to any known mammalian proteins,
and, along with its close relatives, is suspected to be a
salamander-specific innovation. The conclusion is
notable because it might support a paradigm shift in the
regeneration field. Previously, many researchers favored a
theory that epimorphic regeneration of body parts was
an ancestral trait common to all animals that had been
extinguished in some lineages. Thus, re-activating a
regenerative process that might lie latent seemed a
reasonable way to improve regenerative prospects in
humans once the key molecular events were elucidated in
animals that retain regenerative capabilities. If, however,
Prod1 is indeed key, and necessary, in limb regeneration,
but mammals do not possess it, the outlook must be
revised. This realization might lead to more effort being
brought to bear on the question of regeneration itself,
rather than in comparison with development, or to stem
cells, or to any other worthy but potentially limiting
paradigm. The coming decade promises to be an exciting
time for unraveling the secrets to regeneration.
Acknowledgements
Work on regeneration in the Tabin lab is supported by grants from the NIH.
Published: 16 February 2010
References
1. 	 Maki N, Suetsugu-Maki R, Tarui H, Agata K, Del Rio-Tsonis K, Tsonis PA:
Expression of stem cell pluripotency factors during regeneration in newts.
Dev Dyn 2009, 238:1613-1616.
2. 	 Christen B, Robles V, Raya M, Paramonov I, Izpisua Belmonte JC: Regeneration
and reprogramming compared. BMC Biol 2010, 8:5.
3. 	 King MW, Neff AW, Mescher AL: Proteomics analysis of regenerating
amphibian limbs: changes during the onset of regeneration. Int J Dev Biol
2009, 53:955-969.
4. 	 Rao N, Jhamb D, Milner DJ, Li B, Song F, Wang M, Voss SR, Palakal M, King MW,
Saranjami B, Nye HL, Cameron JA, Stocum DL: Proteomic analysis of
blastema formation in regenerating axolotl limbs. BMC Biol 2009, 7:83.
5. 	 Stewart S, Tsun ZY, Izpisua Belmonte JC: A histone demethylase is necessary
for regeneration in zebrafish. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:19889-19894.
6. 	 Whited JL, Tabin CJ: Limb regeneration revisited. J Biol 2009 8:5.
7. 	 Kragl M, Knapp D, Nacu E, Khattak S, Maden M, Epperlein HH, Tanaka EM:
Cells keep a memory of their tissue origin during axolotl limb
regeneration. Nature 2009, 460:60-65.
8. 	 Takahashi K, Yamanaka, S: Induction of pluripotent stem cells from mouse
embryonic and adult fibroblast cultures by defined factors. Cell 2006,
126:663-676.
9. 	 Grow M, Neff AW, Mescher AL, King MW: Global analysis of gene expression
in Xenopus hindlimbs during stage-dependent complete and incomplete
regeneration. Dev Dyn 2006, 235:2667-2685.
10. 	 Garza-Garcias A, Harris R, Esposito D, Gates PB, Driscoll PC: Solution structure
and phylogenetics of Prod1, a member of the three-finger protein
superfamily implicated in salamander limb regeneration. PLoS One 2009,
4:e7123.
See other regeneration and stem cell articles http://jbiol.com/content/8/8/70 and
http://jbiol.com/content/9/2/14
doi:10.1186/jbiol224
Cite this article as: Whited JL and Tabin CJ: Regeneration review reprise.
Journal of Biology 2010, 9:15.

