Minireview

Chromatin ‘programming’ by sequence - is there more to the
nucleosome code than %GC?
Amanda Hughes and Oliver J Rando
Address: Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 364 Plantation Street
No. 903, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.
Correspondence: Oliver Rando. Email: oliver.rando@umassmed.edu

Abstract
The role of genomic sequence in directing the packaging of
eukaryotic genomes into chromatin has been the subject of
considerable recent debate. A new paper from Tillo and Hughes
shows that the intrinsic thermodynamic preference of a given
sequence in the yeast genome for the histone octamer can
largely be captured with a simple model, and in fact is mostly
explained by %GC. Thus, the rules for predicting nucleosome
occupancy from genomic sequence are much less complicated
than has been claimed.

'nucleosome-free region' (NFR) observed at the majority of
yeast promoters. This unanticipated level of order then
raises the question of what underlies the remarkably
consistent chromatin packaging in cell populations. Work
recently published in BMC Bioinformatics by Tillo and
Hughes [4] provides one surprisingly simple answer to this
question, suggesting that the rules for predicting
nucleosome occupancy from genomic sequence may be
much less complicated than had been widely supposed.

See research article http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/10/442.

The positioning of nucleosomes in vivo

Packaging of eukaryotic DNA into nucleosomes has
profound effects on DNA-templated processes. The 147 bp
of DNA wrapped around the histone octamer is generally
believed to be less accessible to DNA-binding proteins than
is the DNA between nucleosomes. The positioning of
nucleosomes relative to underlying sequences therefore
has considerable implications for the regulation of gene
expression, and understanding where nucleosomes are
located and the rules underlying nucleosome positioning
are key questions in understanding transcriptional control.
The recent revolution in genomics technologies has made
genome-wide mapping of nucleosome positions possible in
organisms ranging from budding yeast to humans. These
genome-wide maps provide us with a multitude of
hypotheses regarding the role of nucleosome positioning in
gene regulation (reviewed in [1-3]). Perhaps one of the
biggest surprises from even the earliest of these mapping
efforts (in Saccharomyces cerevisiae) was the observation
that the majority of nucleosomes are ‘well positioned’, that
is, that nucleosomes occupy the same position (in many
cases, to within mapping precision) in the majority of cells
in a mixed population in the mid-log phase of growth (that
is, actively growing unsynchronized yeast). This was a
surprise to many investigators for many reasons, not least
because the a priori expectation for a general packagingprotein complex would include a lack of sequence specificity. Furthermore, yeast promoters turned out to look
very similar to one another, with a nucleosome-depleted

http://jbiol.com/content/8/11/96

Some properties of strongly pro- and antinucleosomal
DNA sequences had already been elaborated in the pregenomic era, but given the limited DNA sequencing
capacity available, the extent to which genomic sequence
programmed chromatin structure in vivo was unknown.
Nucleosome positioning at any given locus can be ascribed
to either local cis sequence cues or trans-acting protein
factors (or, of course, both). Chromatin-remodeling complexes can move or evict nucleosomes, providing the
canonical examples of trans-acting factors [5]. Conversely,
it has been known for decades that there is at least some
variation between DNA sequences in their affinity for the
histone octamer [6]. The basic insight that led to this
realization came originally from the observation that some
DNA sequences were more or less flexible. Because DNA is
sharply bent around the histone octamer, stiff sequences
should be less favorable for nucleosomal incorporation,
whereas flexible sequences or intrinsically curved sequences would be more favorable sites for octamer placement.
In early studies, polyA sequences were shown to be intrinsically stiff, apparently owing to systems of ‘bifurcated’
hydrogen bonds between a given A and two Ts on the
opposite strand. Conversely, because AT dinucleotides
potentially introduce a kink in DNA, spacing of AT
dinucleotides every 10 bp would be expected to result in
DNA with a consistent curvature, reducing the free-energy
cost of bending these sequences and resulting in more
thermodynamically stable nucleosomes.
Since these early observations, the extent to which genomic
sequence directs chromatin structure through intrinsic

Hughes and Rando: Journal of Biology 2009, 8:96

The subsequent sequencing of numerous genomes and the
advent of genomic nucleosome maps provided fodder for a
range of computational studies (reviewed in [1-3]). Initial
studies focused on pronucleosomal sequences with a
10-nucleotide periodicity of AT, AA, or TT dinucleotides.
Two early studies agreed that such sequences were
enriched at the +1 nucleosome position, but these studies
did not capture the dominant feature of yeast promoters nucleosome depletion at the so-called nucleosome-free
region. Subsequent studies from many groups improved
on these models by systematically incorporating antinucleosomal sequences (such as polyA and others) that are
prevalent at yeast promoters and appear to be a major
determinant of nucleosome-free regions in vivo.

In vitro reconstitution studies reveal
‘programmed’ nucleosome-free regions
All of the studies noted above focused on predicting in vivo
nucleosome positions, since in vitro reconstitution data
were sparse. More recently, two groups have carried out
genome-wide experimental studies of intrinsic nucleosome-binding preferences [10,11]. These studies differed in
their conclusions, but the data are quite similar. In essence,
in vitro reconstitution of yeast genomic DNA into
nucleosomes captures nucleosome depletion at yeast
promoters, but little else (Figure 1). The periodic spacing of
AA/AT/TT dinucleotides that is statistically enriched at the
in vivo +1 position does not appear to play a general role in

http://jbiol.com/content/8/11/96

500

0

TSS

A general way to demonstrate that a given sequence
intrinsically favors or disfavors nucleosome incorporation
is to carry out in vitro nucleosome-reconstitution assays
using nothing but histones, DNA and buffer. For instance,
Struhl and colleagues showed that nucleosome depletion at
the HIS3 promoter can be recapitulated in vitro [8], while
Korber and colleagues showed that the PHO5 promoter
can only be assembled into its in vivo packaging in the
presence of yeast extract [9]. Wide-ranging studies from
various groups over decades has provided a great deal of
insight into the rules underlying histone-DNA interactions.
For example, selections for tight-binding sequences
provided the chromatin community with the best-defined
‘pronucleosomal’ sequence, the ‘Widom601’ sequence
(identified by Jon Widom and colleagues), which has been
used in countless in vitro studies [3].

1

-500

preferences has been an active area of investigation. One
approach involved investigations in vivo - seminal studies
from the Struhl group in S. cerevisiae showed that nucleosome depletion at the HIS3 promoter could be enhanced or
diminished by adding or removing polyA sequences [7].
However, in vivo studies are subject to the criticism that it
is nearly impossible to exclude possible effects of an
unknown trans-acting polyA-binding protein, although in
S. cerevisiae this appears to be unlikely to account for the
observations.

Normalized nucleosome occupancy

96.2

Location relative to transcriptional start site
Figure 1
In vitro reconstitutions highlight yeast promoter nucleosome
depletion. In vitro reconstitution data from Kaplan et al. [10] are
shown in pink; data from our own in vivo nucleosome mapping [13]
are in blue for comparison. Deep sequencing reads were mapped
to the S. cerevisiae genome and extended to 140 bp (so each short
read was extended to nucleosome length). Data were normalized
for sequencing depth, and data for around 5,000 genes with welldefined transcriptional start sites (TSSs) were aligned and averaged
over all genes for each dataset. Notably, the nucleosome depletion
at yeast promoters is visible as a prominent valley in both datasets,
whereas the stereotyped positioning of the +1 nucleosome relative
to the transcription start site is clearly visible as a prominent peak
only in the in vivo data. Red and green rectangles indicate regions
previously proposed to be enriched for anti- and pronucleosomal
sequences, respectively.

positioning the +1 nucleosome, and more probably ‘finetunes’ rotational positioning of nucleosomes (that is,
positioning to ±1 nucleotide after large-scale ±5 nucleotide
positioning has been established by other means [1]).
Kaplan et al. [10] argue on the basis of a high (around
0.74) correlation coefficient between the in vitro and in
vivo datasets that in vitro reconstitutions globally capture
in vivo chromatin architecture. However, as Stein et al.
[12] recently showed, the use of correlation coefficients is
misleading because they are subject to the ‘influential point
effect’ - in other words, outlying points drive correlations
(even if the bulk of the data are uncorrelated), and in the
case of chromatin structure these outlying points
correspond to the dramatic nucleosome depletion at
promoters. Indeed, Zhang et al. [11] showed very poor
correspondence between in vivo nucleosome positioning
and in vitro reconstitution data. Thus, we believe that all
extant data support a view in which very little nucleosome
positioning information is intrinsically encoded but that
the yeast genome does program nucleosome depletion at
promoters via antinucleosomal sequences. Below, we will

Hughes and Rando: Journal of Biology 2009, 8:96

96.3

discuss sequence models that attempt to recapitulate the in
vitro reconstitution results, but readers should bear in
mind that nucleosome occupancy rather than nucleosome
positioning is being addressed when correlation coefficients are being used as the summary statistic.

Trimming the fat from computational models
In addition to establishing that intrinsic ‘programming’ of
chromatin architecture is largely limited to nucleosome
depletion at promoters, in vitro reconstitution datasets
also enable more direct testing of computational models of
intrinsic sequence preferences for nucleosomes. For
instance, Kaplan et al. [10] generated a model to predict
the intrinsic preference of a given 147-bp sequence for
nucleosomes. This model consists of a position-independent component (that is, a component that does not
depend on location within the 147-bp sequence), and a
position-dependent component. The position-independent
component was based on measured occupancy of all 5mer
(5-nucleotide) sequences - some 5mers, such as AAAAA,
are rarely found in nucleosomes and thus a sequence carrying AAAAA would be weighted unfavorably for nucleosome
formation. The position-dependent term builds on the
dinucleotide periodicity noted above: for each position
relative to the dyad axis, the frequency of each dinucleotide
was calculated from reconstitution data, and then 147-bp
sequences were scored for their match to this distribution.
Predictions of this model correlated very well (0.89) with
in vitro reconstitution data, suggesting that the majority of
the affinity of a given sequence for the histone octamer is
predictable from sequence (again, note that the use of
correlation coefficients emphasizes outlier sequences, such
as the polyAs found at promoters).
The new work by Tillo and Hughes [11] now extends the
search for sequence rules underlying nucleosome occupancy. Given the large number (more than 2,000) of parameters included in the Kaplan model (all 5mers, plus
dinucleotide frequencies across 127 bp), Tillo and Hughes
asked whether a simpler model might capture most of the
occupancy information encoded in DNA sequence. They
used a linear regression algorithm called Lasso to identify
features that predict nucleosome occupancy in the Kaplan
dataset. Specifically, after selecting a large number of
candidate features (straightforward candidate features
such as %GC content, not complex eigenvectors such as
generated by principal component analysis), Lasso creates
a linear combination model with an emphasis on setting as
many coefficients to zero as possible. The resulting
model(s) had very few parameters, with the model selected
for study having only 14 features.
The resulting sequence model captures in vitro nucleosome
occupancy data nearly as well (R = 0.86) as the Kaplan
model (R = 0.89), indicating that a small number of sequence
features describes most of the variation in nucleosome

http://jbiol.com/content/8/11/96

occupancy in in vitro reconstitutions. Close examination of
the most important features of this model indicates that
%GC and polyA runs are the two dominant factors, with a
simple model using just these features exhibiting a
correlation of 0.72 with in vitro data. Indeed, a model
based on %GC alone showed a correlation of 0.71 with the
in vitro data. Much of this is likely to be a consequence of
the fact that many of the other 13 parameters are correlated
with %GC - AAAA is obviously unlikely in high-GC sequences. Furthermore, many features of DNA three-dimensional structure (the authors specifically note ‘propeller
twist’ and ‘slide’) are also correlated with %GC, and thus
GC content seems to provide a single feature that captures
many related structural characteristics that are important
for nucleosome stability. Additional features in the model
(AAAA, propeller twist, and so on) are then proposed to
indicate features that are important for nucleosome
formation but are not entirely captured by GC content. It is
important to consider that there may also be a confounding
effect of genome structure - yeast promoters are AT-rich
and nucleosome-depleted, so %GC will naturally correlate
with nucleosome depletion whether it is a cause or a
consequence - but the authors also compare their model
with data from synthetic DNA reconstitution data and still
obtain significant correlations with the in vitro data.
These results have a number of important implications for
thinking about how chromatin structure is ‘programmed’.
First, as there are no terms for dinucleotide periodicity in
the Lasso model, these results support the finding of many
groups arguing that nucleosome exclusion by polyA and
related sequences is the dominant feature in in vitro
nucleosome-reconstitution assays. Second, the lack of
support for ‘pronucleosomal’ sequences as major positioning cues in the reconstitution data re-emphasizes the status
of statistical positioning as the best hypothesis to explain
why chromatin is so well ordered in vivo. Third, because
the Tillo and Hughes model also performs reasonably well
on nucleosome-mapping data from Caenorhabditis
elegans, it may prove portable for analysis of genomes
other than yeast. Finally, these results have important
implications for genome structure and evolution, as GC
content varies between organisms and across genomes
(CpG islands being a prominent example).
The recent lively interest in the idea of a ‘nucleosome code’
that might program the packaging of the genome thus
seems somewhat excessive. Tillo and Hughes help clear the
air to some extent, showing that simple models very
effectively capture the majority of the behavior of in vitro
nucleosome-reconstitution experiments. Programming
nucleosome depletion with AT-rich sequences at promoters
is confirmed as a key regulatory strategy in budding yeast
and perhaps C. elegans. These insights may help guide
questions about the evolution of chromatin packaging at
specific loci, and about the regulatory strategies available

Hughes and Rando: Journal of Biology 2009, 8:96

96.4

to promoters with large nucleosome-free regions ‘programmed’ in cis.

8.

Acknowledgements

9.

We thank M Radman-Livaja and N Friedman for critical comments
on this minireview. OJR is supported in part by a Career Award in
the Biomedical Sciences from the Burroughs Wellcome Fund, and
by grants from NIGMS and HFSP.

10.

References
1.

2.

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Jiang C, Pugh BF: Nucleosome positioning and gene regulation: advances through genomics. Nat Rev Genet 2009,
10:161-172.
Radman-Livaja M, Rando OJ: Nucleosome positioning: How
is it established, and why does it matter? Dev Biol 2009
doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.06.012.
Segal E, Widom J: What controls nucleosome positions?
Trends Genet 2009, 25:335-343.
Tillo D, Hughes TR: G+C content dominates intrinsic nucleosome occupancy. BMC Bioinformatics 2009, 10:442.
Clapier CR, Cairns BR: The biology of chromatin remodeling complexes. Annu Rev Biochem 2009, 78:273-304.
Drew HR, Travers AA: DNA bending and its relation to
nucleosome positioning. J Mol Biol 1985, 186:773-790.
Struhl K: Naturally occurring poly(dA-dT) sequences are
upstream promoter elements for constitutive transcription
in yeast. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1985, 82:8419-8423.

http://jbiol.com/content/8/11/96

11.

12.

13.

Sekinger EA, Moqtaderi Z, Struhl K: Intrinsic histone-DNA
interactions and low nucleosome density are important for
preferential accessibility of promoter regions in yeast. Mol
Cell 2005, 18:735-748.
Korber P, Horz W: In vitro assembly of the characteristic
chromatin organization at the yeast PHO5 promoter by a
replication-independent extract system. J Biol Chem 2004,
279:35113-35120.
Kaplan N, Moore IK, Fondufe-Mittendorf Y, Gossett AJ, Tillo D,
Field Y, LeProust EM, Hughes TR, Lieb JD, Widom J, Segal E:
The DNA-encoded nucleosome organization of a eukaryotic genome. Nature 2009, 458:362-366.
Zhang Y, Moqtaderi Z, Rattner BP, Euskirchen G, Snyder M,
Kadonaga JT, Liu XS, Struhl K: Intrinsic histone-DNA interactions are not the major determinant of nucleosome positions in vivo. Nat Struct Mol Biol 2009, 16:847-852.
Stein A, Takasuka TE, Collings CK: Are nucleosome positions in vivo primarily determined by histone-DNA
sequence preferences? Nucleic Acids Res 2009, doi:10.1093/
nar/gkp1043.
Weiner A, Hughes A, Yassour M, Rando OJ, Friedman N: Highresolution nucleosome mapping reveals transcriptiondependent promoter packaging. Genome Res 2009, doi:
10.1101/gr.098509.109.

Published: 23 December 2009
doi:10.1186/jbiol207
© 2009 BioMed Central Ltd

Hughes and Rando: Journal of Biology 2009, 8:96

