Minireview

Mapping the protistan ‘rare biosphere’
Scott C Dawson and Kari D Hagen
Addresses: Department of Microbiology, University of California, Davis, One Shields Avenue, Davis, CA 95616, USA.
Correspondence: Scott C Dawson. Email: scdawson@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
The use of cultivation-independent approaches to map microbial
diversity, including recent work published in BMC Biology, has
now shown that protists, like bacteria/archaea, are much more
diverse than had been realized. Uncovering eukaryotic diversity
may now be limited not by access to samples or cost but rather
by the availability of full-length reference sequence data.
See research article http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/7/72

[3,4]. And although it may seem astounding to some that
we could be unaware of phylum-level protistan taxa, the
discovery of novel eukaryotic SSU rRNA genes in natural
environmental samples mirrors the gaps in our understanding of bacterial and archaeal diversity. Nearly every
time we have surveyed an environment using SSU rRNA
cultivation-independent methods, we have found that it
contains more protistan species than we know from our
culture collections or sequence databases.

The extent of protistan diversity

For several decades now, microbiologists have lived with
the growing realization that the majority of extant microbes
are not in our culture collections. In fact, our historical
reliance on cultivation to identify and quantify microbes
has resulted in our missing upwards of 95% of extant
bacterial and archaeal diversity. Using cultivationindependent molecular approaches to identify microbes by
genetic sequence - specifically small subunit ribosomal
RNA (SSU rRNA) sequences - we have begun to map the
true microbial diversity of the Earth. This cultivationindependent approach to identifying diversity has recently
benefited from the development of next-generation
sequencing technology and a concomitant drop in sequencing costs. With respect to molecular surveys of microbial
diversity in natural environmental samples, pyrosequencing approaches provide unprecedented sampling depth.
Such deep sequencing has purportedly uncovered a rare
and extensive biosphere of bacteria and archaea with a
diversity that is perhaps several orders of magnitude
greater than we had anticipated [1]. And although there
may have been initial overestimations of the magnitude of
the ‘rare biosphere’ because of the intrinsic sequence error
rate pyrosequencing produces [2], many rare and novel
microbes are still being discovered at taxonomic levels
ranging from phyla to species.

Precisely how many protistan species have we missed? In
their analysis of two marine anoxic environments using
massively parallel pyrosequencing recently published in
BMC Biology, Stoeck and colleagues [5] conclude we have
indeed missed considerable protistan diversity. To determine the extent of a possible protistan ‘rare biosphere’,
Stoeck et al. [5] sequenced about 250,000 eukaryoticspecific V9 variable regions of the SSU rRNA. Previous
surveys of these two anoxic environments were limited to
Sanger sequencing of SSU rRNA clone libraries. Novel
protistan diversity was still identified, although at lower
estimated levels [6]. Deep sequencing allows the extensive
characterization of SSU RNA PCR amplicons, and the
authors [5] thereby determined that over 90% of the SSU
rRNA sequence diversity was derived from individual rare
sequences, each of which was identified less than ten times.
They have thus indeed revealed the existence of a protistan
‘rare biosphere’. Although estimates of microbial eukaryotic
diversity could be inflated because of sequencing errors
[2], high copy numbers of the rRNA operon in eukaryotes
[7], or simply high sequence variability or divergence in
closely related organisms [7], Stoeck et al. [5] suggest that
there are probably higher numbers of rare protistan
microbes than estimated from previous molecular surveys.

Although we have observed protists in the wild for over
three centuries and have classified them on the basis of
morphology and motility, use of the modern molecular
techniques that have provided insight into uncultivated
bacterial/archaeal diversity has been limited in protists.
Recent eukaryote-specific cultivation-independent studies
to assess the extent of microbial eukaryotic diversity have
identified many novel taxa at a range of taxonomic levels

Some natural environments may harbor more undiscovered protistan diversity than others, and this was a
primary motivation for the analysis of anoxic environments
by Stoeck et al. [5]. Such environments are perhaps the
least studied because of the presumption that eukaryotes
(including animals) require oxygen and are limited by
sulfide. Yet anaerobic protists are common inhabitants of
anoxic environments, deriving energy through fermentation

http://jbiol.com/content/8/12/105

Dawson and Hagen: Journal of Biology 2009, 8:105

105.2

rather than aerobic respiration. Our anthropocentric frame
of reference has probably limited our search, and thus our
understanding of eukaryotic diversity and ecology, by
focusing primarily on oxic environments. Importantly, the
authors [5] detected eukaryotic microbes from all major
protistan groups in their anoxic sediment samples, indicating that these environments harbor the same types of
eukaryotic microbes as more familiar oxic environments.

deep sequencing of larger full-length rRNA amplicons with
the shorter V9 variable region amplicons is needed to
determine the effectiveness of each sequencing strategy. In
addition, the limited number of full-length sequences in
our current eukaryotic SSU rRNA database (several orders
of magnitude fewer than the available bacterial and
archaeal rRNA sequences) complicates the taxonomic
identification of the shorter V9 fragments [9].

Defining and quantifying eukaryotic microbial
diversity using rRNA

Lastly, both methods of sequencing of rRNA genes to assess
protistan diversity require PCR amplification. All PCRbased rRNA surveys rely on ‘eukaryotic-specific’ SSU rRNA
primers that are, notably, derived from the existing (and
limited) rRNA sequence data [9]. Deep sequencing strategies will uncover new sequences, but only if the regions
from which the primers are designed have been sufficiently
sampled and sequenced for eukaryotic diversity. Because
much of known cultivated (and uncultivated) eukaryotic
diversity has been determined from PCR amplification of
SSU rRNA using conserved sequence regions, we still have
little actual sequence data at the extreme 5’ and 3’ ends of
SSU rRNA. We can only search for sequences similar to
those that are already known. How, then, can we design
PCR primers that are both specific to eukaryotes but also
broad enough to identify unknown groups? Even in this
study [5], in which the V9 region at the extreme 3’ end of
SSU rRNA was PCR amplified and sequenced, there could
be more unamplified and thus hidden eukaryotic diversity.
As we continue to deeply sequence more variable regions
we might find that we have again underestimated
eukaryotic diversity. Additional sequencing of genomes
from cultivated protists or identification of eukaryotic
rRNA sequences from directly sequenced metagenomic
studies could provide more reference sequences.

The availability and cost-effectiveness of high-throughput
sequencing - albeit of relatively short DNA fragments forces the issue of how to define diversity. If we use only
the V9 regions, definitions of eukaryotic species or operational taxonomic units (OTUs) will be based solely on a
single short variable region of SSU rRNA. Traditionally, we
have been confident in our assessment of novelty because
we have used longer full-length rRNA sequences for phylogenetic analyses. Larger fragments (over 1,000 nucleotides) contain more phylogenetic signal and allow us to
compare and classify environmental sequences relative to
known protistan rRNAs in genetic databases [8]. A primary
motivation for using deep sequencing to understand
microbial diversity is that such strategies may obviate
potential erroneous estimations of diversity resulting from
the construction of clone libraries of larger fragments.
Currently, we can achieve massive sequencing only of
shorter DNA sequences (less than 400 nucleotides) with
pyrosequencing. Thus, we are left with the tradeoff for
environmental surveys of having either massive sequence
numbers or longer sequence lengths but not both.
In bacteria and archaea, full-length SSU rRNA genes with
97% or less sequence identity are generally defined as
distinct OTUs [8]. In their investigations, Stoeck and
colleagues [5] classified ‘unique’ protistan sequences using
both liberal (one nucleotide difference per V9 region
sequence) and conservative (five or seven nucleotide
differences in the V9 region) definitions of novelty. The
number of OTUs derived (several hundred to several
thousand) depended on the criteria used; however,
considerable diversity was detected, supporting the idea of
a protistan ‘rare biosphere’. For now, it seems reasonable
to use the bacterial/archaeal OTU definition (97% sequence
identity) for microbial eukaryotes; if only the short V9
variable region were sequenced, an amplicon with just
three nucleotide differences would define an OTU.
Is the deep sequencing strategy more effective than Sanger
sequencing of larger fragment clone libraries for identifying and characterizing protistan diversity? Although Stoeck
and colleagues [5] reanalyzed environmental samples
previously used to generate Sanger sequenced clone
libraries, they did not pyrosequence larger SSU rRNA
amplicons from the same libraries. A direct comparison of

http://jbiol.com/content/8/12/105

Further challenges in assessing eukaryotic
microbial diversity
With the work of Stoeck et al. [5], we expand the outlines
of known (albeit uncultivated and uncharacterized)
protistan diversity. The approach taken and adapted to
protistan SSU rRNA [5] builds on previous work and
harnesses the power of deep sequencing to map eukaryotic
microbial diversity. Perhaps the main technological
impediment to uncovering eukaryotic diversity is no longer
access to samples or cost of sequence, but rather the availability of existing full-length sequence data from cultivated
and uncultivated protists for use as a reference database.
Shorter sequence reads enable us to identify novel
sequences, but these shorter reads must either be mapped
onto full-length sequences for accurate phylogenetic
identification, or used as ‘phylogenetic stains’ in rRNAtargeted fluorescent in situ hybridizations to identify target
organisms [10]. Despite these looming challenges, the
high-throughput sequencing strategy of Stoeck et al. [5]
confirms and expands what we surmised from previous
clone-based studies that surveyed eukaryotic diversity in

Dawson and Hagen: Journal of Biology 2009, 8:105

105.3

anoxic environments: we have missed much of it.
Application of this and other molecular strategies to assess
diversity will help us to close these gaps and understand
the true nature and extent of protistan diversity.

References
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

Sogin ML, Morrison HG, Huber JA, Mark Welch D, Huse SM,
Neal PR, Arrieta JM, Herndl GJ: Microbial diversity in the
deep sea and the underexplored “rare biosphere”. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:12115-12120.
Kunin V, Engelbrektson A, Ochman H, Hugenholtz P: Wrinkles
in the rare biosphere: pyrosequencing errors lead to artificial inflation of diversity estimates. Environ Microbiol 2009,
doi:10.1111/j.1462-2920.2009.02051.x.
Dawson SC, Pace NR: Novel kingdom-level eukaryotic
diversity in anoxic environments. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2002, 99:8324-8329.
Caron DA, Worden AZ, Countway PD, Demir E, Heidelberg KB:
Protists are microbes too: a perspective. ISME J 2009, 3:
4-12.
Stoeck T, Behnke A, Christen R, Amaral-Zettler L, RodriguezMora MJ, Chistoserdov A, Orsi W, Edgcomb VP: Massively
parallel tag sequencing reveals the complexity of anaerobic marine protistan communities. BMC Biol 2009, 7:72.

http://jbiol.com/content/8/12/105

6.

Behnke A, Bunge J, Barger K, Breiner HW, Alla V, Stoeck T:
Microeukaryote community patterns along an O2/H2S gradient in a supersulfidic anoxic fjord (Framvaren, Norway).
Appl Environ Microbiol 2006, 72:3626-3636.
7. Rooney AP: Mechanisms underlying the evolution and
maintenance of functionally heterogeneous 18S rRNA
genes in Apicomplexans. Mol Biol Evol 2004, 21:1704-1711.
8. Caron DA, Countway PD, Savai P, Gast RJ, Schnetzer A,
Moorthi SD, Dennett MR, Moran DM, Jones AC: Defining
DNA-based operational taxonomic units for microbialeukaryote ecology. Appl Environ Microbiol 2009, 75:57975808.
9. Pruesse E, Quast C, Knittel K, Fuchs BM, Ludwig W, Peplies J,
Glockner FO: SILVA: a comprehensive online resource for
quality checked and aligned ribosomal RNA sequence data
compatible with ARB. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:7188-7196.
10. Amann RI, Krumholz L, Stahl DA: Fluorescentoligonucleotide probing of whole cells for determinative,
phylogenetic, and environmental studies in microbiology.
J Bacteriol 1990, 172:762-770.

Published: 29 December 2009
doi:10.1186/jbiol201
© 2009 BioMed Central Ltd

Dawson and Hagen: Journal of Biology 2009, 8:105

