Harvey Journal of Biology 2010, 9:8
http://jbiol.com/content/9/1/8

MINIREVIEW

Bunched and Madm: a novel growth-regulatory
complex?
Kieran F Harvey*
See research article at http://jbiol.com/content/9/1/9

Abstract
By combining Drosophila genetics and proteomics
Gluderer et al. report in this issue of Journal of Biology
the isolation of a novel growth-regulatory complex
consisting of Bunched and Madm. Future study of this
complex will address the precise mechanism of growth
control, regulation of complex activity, the interface
with other growth pathways and a potential role in
human cancer.

Cancer is a complex group of diseases that stems from
the accumulation of mutations in genes that control
fundamental biological processes, such as cell growth,
proliferation, survival and migration. The study of model
organisms has provided several seminal contributions to
our understanding of cancer, originating with Theodor
Boveri’s hypothesis drawn from sea urchin-based studies
in the early 1900s that cancer arises because of chromo­
somal abnormalities [1]. In more recent times, mutations
in dozens of genes have been shown to contribute to the
genesis of different cancers and their discovery has been
facilitated by various approaches: isolation of oncogenic
viruses; close examination of familial cancer; cyto­genetics;
positional cloning; genetic screens in model organisms
followed by analysis of mutation status of human homo­
logs in cancerous cells; genome-wide analysis of gene
expres­sion and copy number changes; and high-through­
put sequencing and genome-wide association studies.

Flies and cancer
Drosophila melanogaster has proved to be a very valuable
organism for the discovery of novel signaling proteins
*Correspondence: kieran.harvey@petermac.org
Cell Growth and Proliferation Laboratory, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre,
7 St Andrews Place, East Melbourne, Victoria 3002, Australia and Department of
Pathology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia
© 2010 BioMed Central Ltd

© 2010 BioMed Central Ltd

and pathways that control various biological processes. A
major tool in the armory of Drosophila biologists has
been forward genetic screens. Over time, many different
mutation and screening strategies have been used by
Drosophila biologists, with great success. One such
screen­ing approach, the so-called Flp recombinase/Flp
recombinase target (Flp/FRT) clonal screen, has
facilitated the discovery of many new growth regulators
by several laboratories, predominantly in the late 1990s
and early 2000s. Essentially, the Flp/FRT technique allows
the creation of patches of homozygous mutant tissue in a
heterozygous animal. Thus, growth-regulatory genes that
normally cause pre-adult lethality when homozygous
were recovered using such screens.
Subsequently, many of the human homologs of genes
that regulate growth in Drosophila were linked to the
genesis of human cancers. These included several
regulators of the insulin and Target of rapamycin (TOR)
pathways [2], the ubiquitin ligase Archipelago (Ago) [3]
and a novel signaling pathway, the Salvador/Warts/Hippo
(SWH) pathway [4,5]. Deregulation of the insulin and
TOR pathways has well described links to human cancer;
for example, PTEN, which represses activity of the insulin
pathway, is one of the most commonly mutated human
tumor suppressor genes. Following its discovery in 2001,
the human ortholog of Ago has been shown to be
mutated at varying frequencies in a wide range of human
cancers, including ovarian cancer, colon cancer and T cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia [6]. Several lines of
evidence have also linked altered activity of different
SWH pathway components to human cancer, although
the degree to which deregulation of this pathway contri­
butes to the genesis of different human cancers is still
being determined [5].

Bunched and Madm: a new growth-promoting
complex
Most Drosophila Flp/FRT screens were designed to
isolate genes that restrict tissue growth. The screen
originally used by the Hafen laboratory [2] was designed
in such a way that it could capture both growth

Harvey Journal of Biology 2010, 9:8
http://jbiol.com/content/9/1/8

suppressors and genes required to promote growth. Two
such growth-promoting genes were bunched (bun) and
Mlf1 adapter molecule (Madm), which were isolated
based on the fact that tissue harbouring mutations in
these genes exhibited a growth deficiency [7,8]. The
mechanism of action and function of neither gene has
been well characterized in flies or mammals. Bun is a
putative transcription factor that influences Drosophila
oogenesis and nervous system development. There are
four mammalian bun homologs, one of which, Trans­
forming growth factor-β-stimulated clone 22 (TSC22D1),
has been hypothesized to be a tumor suppressor gene
from its ability to repress growth and survival of cultured
cells [9]. However, its precise function, and that of its
three homologs, has not been well characterized in vivo
in mammals. The bun gene encodes variant gene
products, and only the long Bun proteins (such as BunA)
seem to promote growth, whereas shorter isoforms have
been shown to antagonize longer Bun isoforms [7,10].
Although Madm was first isolated using its ability to bind
the Myeloid leukemia factor 1 (Mlf1) oncoprotein [11],
the work by Gluderer et al. in this issue of Journal of
Biology [8] is the first in vivo functional study of Madm.
The findings of Gluderer et al. [8] suggest that Bun and
Madm form a novel growth-controlling complex (Figure 1).
Their work [8] highlights the power of combining
multiple experimental approaches (in this case genetics
and biochemistry) to elucidate protein function. Madm
was isolated as a BunA-interacting partner by affinity
purification and mass spectrometry, and, in parallel, it
was isolated in the above-described Flp/FRT growth
screen. The combined approach provided complementary
validation for the function of Madm and also provided a
hint at mechanism: that Bun and Madm control growth
tissue growth in partnership. They appear to do so in an
obligate fashion as overexpression of both bun and
Madm is required to induce tissue overgrowth [8]. The
major challenges arising from this discovery are to define
the mechanism by which BunA and Madm promote
growth and to explore the role of their mammalian
homologs in normal tissue growth and in cancer.

Possible mechanisms of action of the BunA-Madm
complex
Gluderer et al. have proposed a number of possible
mechanisms by which BunA and Madm promote tissue
growth [8]. One possibility is that BunA and Madm are
components of an existing growth-regulatory pathway.
Tissues lacking bun or Madm show some similarities to
the phenotypic characteristics of tissues with compro­
mised insulin or TOR pathway activity, such as small cell
size and reduced cell number [7,8]. However, Gluderer et
al. previously showed [7] that bun is unlikely to control
insulin or TOR pathway activity. Alternatively, BunA and

Page 2 of 4

?

?

Madm

?

BunA

BunS
P

Protein
secretion

Growth genes?

Tissue growth
Figure 1. The Bun-Madm growth-regulatory complex. Long
isoforms of Bun (such as BunA) promote tissue growth in partnership
with Madm. Short Bun isoforms (BunB-E, collectively denoted BunS)
can antagonize BunA, thus inhibiting its function. The existence of
other unknown proteins (question marks), such as a transmembrane
receptor protein, that function either upstream or downstream
of the BunA-Madm complex is currently unclear (dashed lines).
The mechanism by which the BunA-Madm complex is regulated
probably involves BunA phosphorylation (P). BunA and Madm are
likely to promote growth by controlling transcription and/or protein
secretion.

Madm might constitute a novel growth-promoting path­
way. If this is the case, an obvious question is how a Bun/
Madm pathway would interface with other growth path­
ways to coordinately modulate tissue growth, particularly
during development, when patterning cues and nutrient
signals need to be orchestrated to specify organ and
organism size.
The exact molecular steps by which BunA and Madm
promote tissue growth also remain mysterious. Bun has
been proposed to be a transcription factor and therefore
might stimulate expression of a growth-promoting trans­
criptional program, but so far no such target genes have
been identified. Loss-of-function mutations in bun were

Harvey Journal of Biology 2010, 9:8
http://jbiol.com/content/9/1/8

recovered lacking the carboxyl terminus, which includes
the DNA-binding TSC box of BunA and the leucine
zipper [7]. To establish whether BunA-mediated trans­
crip­tion is essential for BunA-Madm to drive growth, it
would be desirable to determine whether a BunA protein
that is incapable of binding DNA as a result of TSC-box
missense mutations that abrogate DNA binding can
rescue bun deficiency.
Another possibility is that the BunA-Madm complex
regulates protein secretion. BunA and Madm both
localize to the Golgi, and Madm has been shown to affect
transport from the endoplasmic reticulum to Golgi
[8,12]. In addition, RNAi-mediated repression of either
Madm or bun was found to inhibit protein secretion in
cultured cells [13], although it is unclear whether BunA
and Madm regulate secretion in a cooperative manner. It
is also unclear whether the ability of BunA and Madm to
control protein secretion is linked to their role as
regulators of tissue growth.

Regulation of the Bun-Madm complex
The regulation of BunA and Madm is another important
outstanding issue that will need to be addressed in future
studies. For example, it will be important to identify the
proteins that function upstream and downstream of
BunA-Madm, as well any potential transmembrane
receptor proteins regulating their activity (Figure  1). A
common feature of the regulation of all known signaling
pathways is phosphorylation. BunA is phosphorylated in
a conserved amino-terminal domain [14] and this is likely
to modulate its activity. Identification of kinases and
phosphatases that regulate BunA, and examination of a
role for Madm in mediating BunA phosphorylation,
should shed light on the regulation of growth by these
proteins. Madm has been postulated to regulate the
activity of Mlf1 by controlling its nuclear access [11]
and may exert similar control over BunA. However, so
far no evidence of nuclear localization of BunA has been
found [8].
Transcriptional control of the bun gene offers another
potential mode of regulation of the BunA-Madm
complex. In cultured mammalian cells, TSC22D1 trans­
cription is controlled by TGFβ [15], but it is unclear
whether this mode of transcriptional control is conserved
for bun genes across diverse species. In addition, as
described by Gluderer et al. [8], the bun locus gives rise
to long and short Bun proteins and the short Bun
proteins have been shown to antagonize the longer
isoforms, possibly by heterodimerization and subsequent
disruption of growth-promoting BunA complexes [7].
Modulation of bun transcription under utilization of
different promoters that yield discrete Bun isoforms
might therefore modulate the net growth-regulatory
output of the bun locus.

Page 3 of 4

Mammalian Bun and Madm homologs and cancer
There is a high degree of conservation between growth
control programs that function in flies and in mammals.
A major unresolved question regarding the Bun-Madm
growth control complex is whether deregulation of their
human homologs contributes to the genesis of cancer.
The short isoform of TSC22D1 was initially hypothesized
to be a tumor suppressor [9], but the growth-regulatory
role of long TSC-22 isoforms and of Madm in mammals
remains unresolved. Assuming that the function of BunA
and Madm is conserved between flies and mammals, the
loss of Madm or of one of the four TSC22 family genes
might be expected to impair tissue growth and therefore
not to be tumor-promoting. In addition, given that
genetic studies in Drosophila have shown that BunA and
Madm promote growth in an obligate partnership, human
homologs of both genes would need to be overexpressed
or amplified in order to promote tumorigenesis, which is
unlikely to be a common event. The most likely tumorpromoting effect of this complex might be reduced
expression of short isoforms of the TSC22 gene family,
which might alleviate TSC-22-Madm repression. While
these possibilities are being investigated in mammalian
cells, studies in Drosophila are likely to continue to lead
the way in unraveling the mechanism by which the newly
identified Bun-Madm complex controls tissue growth.
Published: 11 February 2010
References
1.	 Boveri T: Über mehrpolige Mitosen als Mittel zur Analyse des Zellkerns.
[Concerning multipolar mitoses as a means of analysing the cell nucleus]
Verh Phys Med Ges Würzburg 1902, 35:67-90.
2.	 Hafen E: Cancer, type 2 diabetes, and ageing: news from flies and worms.
Swiss Med Wkly 2004, 134:711-719.
3.	 Moberg KH, Bell DW, Wahrer DC, Haber DA, Hariharan IK: Archipelago
regulates Cyclin E levels in Drosophila and is mutated in human cancer cell
lines. Nature 2001, 413:311-316 .
4.	 Tapon N, Harvey KF, Bell DW, Wahrer DC, Schiripo TA, Haber DA, Hariharan IK:
Salvador promotes both cell cycle exit and apoptosis in Drosophila and is
mutated in human cancer cell lines. Cell 2002, 110:467-478.
5.	 Harvey K, Tapon N: The Salvador-Warts-Hippo pathway - an emerging
tumour suppressor network. Nat Rev Cancer 2007, 7:182-191.
6.	 Welcker M, Clurman B: FBW7 ubiquitin ligase: a tumour suppressor at the
crossroads of cell division, growth and differentiation. Nat Rev Cancer 2008,
8:83-93.
7.	 Gluderer S, Oldham S, Rintelen F, Sulzer A, Schutt C, Wu X, Raftery LA, Hafen E,
Stocker H: Bunched, the Drosophila homolog of the mammalian tumor
suppressor TSC-22, promotes cellular growth. BMC Dev Biol 2008, 8:10.
8.	 Gluderer S, Brunner E, Rintelen F, Germann, M, Jovaisaite V, Changqing L,
Rentsch CA, Hafen E, Stocker H: Madm (Mlf1 adapter molecule) co-operates
with Bunched A to promote growth in Drosophila. J Biol 2010, 9:9.
9.	 Nakashiro K, Kawamata H, Hino S, Uchida D, Miwa Y, Hamano H, Omotehara F,
Yoshida H, Sato M: Down-regulation of TSC-22 (transforming growth factor
beta-stimulated clone 22) markedly enhances the growth of a human
salivary gland cancer cell line in vitro and in vivo. Cancer Res 1998,
58:549-555.
10.	 Wu X, Yamada-Mabuchi M, Morris EJ, Tanwar PS, Dobens L, Gluderer S, Khan
S, Cao J, Stocker H, Hafen E, Dyson NJ, Raftery LA: The Drosophila homolog
of human tumor suppressor TSC-22 promotes cellular growth,
proliferation, and survival. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:5414-5419.
11.	 Lim R, Winteringham LN, Williams JH, McCulloch RK, Ingley E, Tiao JY, Lalonde
JP, Tsai S, Tilbrook PA, Sun Y, Wu X, Morris SW, Klinken SP: MADM, a novel

Harvey Journal of Biology 2010, 9:8
http://jbiol.com/content/9/1/8

adaptor protein that mediates phosphorylation of the 14-3-3 binding site
of myeloid leukemia factor 1. J Biol Chem 2002, 277:40997-41008.
12.	 De Langhe S, Haataja L, Senadheera D, Groffen J, Heisterkamp N: Interaction
of the small GTPase Rac3 with NRBP, a protein with a kinase-homology
domain. Int J Mol Med 2002, 9:451-459.
13.	 Bard F, Casano L, Mallabiabarrena A, Wallace E, Saito K, Kitayama H, Guizzunti
G, Hu Y, Wendler F, Dasgupta R, Perrimon N, Malhotra V: Functional genomics
reveals genes involved in protein secretion and Golgi organization. Nature
2006, 439:604-607.
14.	 Bodenmiller B, Malmstrom J, Gerrits B, Campbell D, Lam H, Schmidt A, Rinner
O, Mueller LN, Shannon PT, Pedrioli PG, Panse C, Lee HK, Schlapbach R,
Aebersold R: PhosphoPep--a phosphoproteome resource for systems

Page 4 of 4

biology research in Drosophila Kc167 cells. Mol Syst Biol 2007, 3:139.
15.	 Shibanuma M, Kuroki T, Nose K: Isolation of a gene encoding a putative
leucine zipper structure that is induced by transforming growth factor
beta 1 and other growth factors. J Biol Chem 1992, 267:10219-10224.

doi:10.1186/jbiol219
Cite this article as: Harvey KF: Bunched and Madm: a novel growthregulatory complex? Journal of Biology 2010, 9:8.

