Lampugnani Journal of Biology 2010, 9:16
http://jbiol.com/content/9/3/16

MINIREVIEW

Endothelial adherens junctions and the actin
cytoskeleton: an ‘infinity net’?
Maria Grazia Lampugnani*
See research article http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/11

Abstract
A recent paper in BMC Biology reports that actin stress
fibers in adjacent cultured endothelial cells are linked
through adherens junctions. This organization might
provide a super-cellular network that could enable
coordinated signaling and structural responses in
endothelia.

The title of this minireview is inspired by the work of the
Japanese artist Yayoi Kusama, who paints wonderful
networks as one of her favorite subjects. As an artist, she
can evoke images and concepts that are sometimes
beyond her own knowledge: in this case her idea of a
continuous network well suits a model of intercellular
cytoskeletal linking suggested by a recent paper published
in BMC Biology by Millan et al. [1]. Working with cultured
human umbilical cord vein endothelial cells they find that
actin-based stress fibers in adjacent endothelial cells in
confluent culture can become linked through adherens
junctions. This organization could, in theory, enable a
communication network extending throughout the
endothelium, as well as maintaining structural coherence
and increasing resistance to stress. This capacity could be
crucial to the function and adaptability of the endo­
thelium, which is continuously exposed to changes in
blood flow, whether in normal physiologic situations, or
during inflammation or angiogenesis.
This is a novel extension of a concept first used for
epithelial sheets [2] to endothelial monolayers.

The adherens junction
The intercellular junctions between endothelial cells
maintain endothelial integrity, controlling the movement
of solutes between bloodstream and tissues, and the flow
*Correspondence: mariagrazia.lampugnani@ifom-ieo-campus.it
IFOM, FIRC Institute of Molecular Oncology, via Adamello, 16-20139 Milan, Italy
and Mario Negri Institute of Pharmacology, via La Masa, 19-20156 Milan, Italy
© 2010 BioMed Central Ltd

© 2010 BioMed Central Ltd

of white blood cells between blood and tissues, especially
at sites of infection and inflammation. Adherens junc­
tions both mediate adhesion between cells and support
the local concentration of scaffolding and signaling mole­
cules. This enables molecular interactions that otherwise
would not take place and the segregation of signaling
molecules for specific regulation (for a general descrip­
tion of the organization of cell-cell contacts in endothelial
cells see [3]). Adherens junctions are based on the trans­
membrane adhesive receptor that belongs to the cadherin
family and a notable and specific feature of the endo­
thelial junctions is the presence of the tissue-specific
vascular endothelial (VE)-cadherin. VE-cadherin is con­
stitu­tively linked through its cytoplasmic tail directly to
β- or γ-catenin (plakoglobin) or the catenin p120, and
indirectly to α-catenin via β- or γ-catenin.
From studies in epithelial and endothelial cells, the
conventional view of adherens junctions is that they link
through the catenin complex to cortical actin filaments
that lie parallel to the cell surface. In their confluent
endothelial cell cultures, however, Millan et al. [1] found
an additional type of adherens junction organization.
They found that staining for junctional components such
as VE-cadherin revealed lines of staining running in from
the cell surface rather than lying parallel to the cell
surface as in conventional adherens junction complexes.
The authors call these novel junctions ‘discontinuous
adherens junctions’ to distinguish them from those more
familiar from epithelial cells. Further staining for VEcadherin and actin revealed that actin stress fibers
running perpendicular to the cell surface were associated
with these discontinuous adherens junctions (Figure 1).

Local regulation of actin by adherens junctions in
endothelial cells
At early phases of junction formation, actin filaments
organize perpendicularly to the membrane through the
local accumulation of actin-nucleating complexes [4].
Further stages of junction maturation are accompanied by
the development of actin fibers parallel to the mem­brane
to form a peripheral actin rim ([5] and references therein).
It is not clear at present whether the perpendicular actin

Lampugnani Journal of Biology 2010, 9:16
http://jbiol.com/content/9/3/16

Page 2 of 4

?

?

?

?

?

?

‘Stable’ stress fiber
domain

‘Dynamic’ stress fiber
domain

Actin polymerization
Rac activated
Rho activated/signal to Dia
Quiescent endothelium

Adherens junctions

?

?

?

Contractile response
and intercellular gaps
Acto myosin contraction
Rho activated/signal to ROCK
Inflammation,
leukocyte transmigration,
angiogenesis

Actin stress fibers

Figure 1. Structural and functional actin filament organization at cell-cell junctions in endothelial cells. In quiescent cells, junctional actin
filaments can be oriented either parallel (left-hand image) or perpendicular (center image) to the cell surface. A question mark indicates that it is
not known whether these two types of arrangement can interchange, or whether the perpendicular arrangement must arise de novo. Actomyosin
stress fibers are anchored to the membrane through adherens junctions [1]. VE-cadherin is required, but the stress fibers are not directly linked to
the cadherin-catenin complex. They are possibly tethered to adherens junctions by afadin or other, still unidentified molecules (see Figure 2, and
text for details). Subdomains with perpendicular actin fibers, called ‘discontinuous adherens junctions’ in [1], are dynamic, and undergo constant
reorganization. In these areas, actin fibers of adjoining cells are connected through adherens junctions into a supercellular network [1]. In quiescent
endothelial cells, actin stress fibers are polymerized through the action of Rac and Rho, Rho signaling through the actin nucleator Dia (diaphanousrelated formin) [7]. Various stimuli activate the endothelium and induce actomyosin contraction at the dynamic domains (right-hand image), with
Rho signaling through the protein kinase ROCK [7], and resulting in the opening of intercellular gaps, making the endothelium permeable to fluid
and molecules, and facilitating the transmigration of leukocytes. In activated conditions, adherens junctions are also functionally and structurally
modified (indicated by the change of the junctional symbol to blue). The molecular details of such alterations are still incompletely understood.
The association of actin with adherens junctions is also likely to be modified. It remains to be defined at which molecules/structures (indicated by
question marks) anchor the actin fibers at the ends that are not interacting with the adherens junction. This anchoring is critical to allow productive
contraction.

fibers described by Millan et al. [1] are residual early
fibers or derive by de novo organization. Actin reorgani­
za­tion at cell-cell junctions proceeds through the action
of several regulators that concentrate locally (Figure 2).
A crucial molecule in the organization of actin at the
adherens junctions is α-catenin. The molecular features
of the relationship between α-catenin and actin have
been profoundly revised in recent years (reviewed in [6]).
Instead of a ‘simple’ bridge between junctional cadherin
and the actin microfilament cytoskeleton, α-catenin is
now considered to act as a regulator of actin polymeriza­
tion. For allosteric reasons α-catenin cannot bind at the
same time to β-catenin and actin filaments. Dimeric αcatenin binds with high affinity to actin filaments, and
inhibiting Arp2/3 activity suppresses actin branching. In

addition, dimeric α-catenin promotes the formation of
linear actin cables by activating formin (Figure 2; [6] and
references therein).
If α-catenin is not the tether between VE-cadherin and
actin, which junctional components might be? This is not
known at present. Afadin, a cytoplasmic molecule
localized at adherens junctions bound to the nectin
adhesive receptors, can anchor actin to the plasma
membrane and could contribute to the stabilization of
the peripheral actin rim [5,6]. Which other junctional
components might tether actin filaments to adherens
junctions remains to be determined.
In addition, β-catenin has an important role in
regulating the behavior of actin. Small GTPases of the
Rho family that have crucial effects on the control of

Lampugnani Journal of Biology 2010, 9:16
http://jbiol.com/content/9/3/16

Page 3 of 4

nectin
nectin

afadin
Unbranched
actin stress
fibers

VE-cadherin
VE-cadherin

β-catenin
α-catenin-monomer
Rac

Tiam

Actin polymerization
Epac

PI3K
βc
VE-cadherin
VE-cadherin

p120

p190RhoGAP

α-catenin-dimer

cAMP

Rap1
en CCM1
in
CCM2
CCM3
MAGI
PDZ-GEF1
Rho
at

VE-cadherin
VE-cadherin

Arp2/3

Formin
Unbranched
actin stress
fibers

Actomyosin
contraction

Myosin

Figure 2. Schematic representation of some signaling networks that control the formation of actin stress fibers at adherens junctions
in endothelial cells. VE-cadherin can directly or indirectly recruit regulators of actin polymerization, among which is the small GTPase Rac as
well as regulators of Rac and Rho. Regulators include Rac activators, such as the small GPTPase Rap1 (linked through CCM1 and β-catenin) and its
guanine-exchange factor, PDZ-GEF (linked through MAGI and β-catenin), the Rac guanine-exchange factor Tiam (through the local activation of
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), and Vav2. Tiam and Rac can be localized at junctions also through the Par polarity complex (not shown in the
figure) [17]. Rho inhibitors include CCM2 (linked through CCM1 and β-catenin and down-regulating Rho activity through a still poorly defined
mechanism) and p190RhoGAP (linked through p120). Rap1 can convey signals from cAMP, through its GEF, Epac [8]. Therefore, local clustering
of VE-cadherin as well as regulation of the association of β-catenin and p120 to VE-cadherin appears crucial to the assembly of a molecular unit
controlling actin polymerization and contraction at junctions. Pharmacological tools to modulate this complex might be of therapeutic relevance.

actin polymerization [4] and on the contractility of
actomyosin are recruited and regulated at adherens
junctions through β-catenin (Figure 2; see [7] for a
comprehensive review of the roles of these GTPases in
epithelial cells).
Remodeling or de novo polymerization of actin
filaments can be controlled by the GTPases Rac and Rho,
while Rho also affects the contractility of actomyosin, the
complex of actin and myosin that makes up the
contractile stress fibers. Rac signaling at adherens
junctions is likely to be downstream of the small GTPase
Rap1 [8], which in endothelial cells can be localized at
adherens junctions in a complex with VE-cadherin
through CCM1 and β-catenin [9]. In addition, Rap1 can
be activated at junctions by PDZ-GEF, recruited locally
by the protein MAGI, which is linked to VE-cadherin
through β-catenin [10]. Rap1 can also convey signals
from cAMP, through its guanine nucleotide exchange
factor (GEF) Epac, to stabilize the barrier properties of
the endothelium both in vitro and in vivo [8].

Exaggerated actomyosin contractility has been
proposed to be detrimental to the correct function of the
endothelium as a barrier to the passage of cells and
molecules. This idea is supported by the fact that to
maintain junctional stability in the endothelium, the
activity of Rho has to be restricted. The specific Rho
inhibitor p190Rho-GAP is required in endothelial cells to
maintain endothelial integrity and endothelial barrier
function. In this case p120 catenin acts as scaffold [11].
Cerebral cavernous malformation protein 2 (CCM2) also
inhibits Rho activity [12]. CCM2 is one component of the
CCM complex that comprises also CCM1 and CCM3
(Figure 2). Mutation of any of these three molecules can
cause the human pathological condition cerebral
cavernous malformation. These vascular abnormalities of
the brain are fragile and leaky and can cause hemorrhagic
stroke and neurological symptoms [13]. Drugs that
inhibit Rho, such as simvastatin, have proved effective in
correcting increased vascular permeability in mice with a
heterozygous mutation of CCM2 [12].

Lampugnani Journal of Biology 2010, 9:16
http://jbiol.com/content/9/3/16

It remains to be defined how all these molecular actors
can be regulated locally to create the different domains of
junctional actin reported by Millan et al. [1].
Finally, to set the observations reported by Millan et al.
[1] in a physiological context, an appreciation of the
correspondence between in vitro models of endothelial
cells and the endothelium in vivo is important. Adherens
junctions and stress fibers are readily observed in
endothelial cells in vitro. Adherens junctions are present
in the endothelium of all types of blood vessels in vivo as
observed by in situ immunofluorescence and immuno­
electron microscopy for junction-specific molecules [14].
Reports on the organization of actin in the endothelium
in vivo are, however, very limited and somewhat contro­
versial [15,16]. While suggesting that actin stress fibers
can be observed in vivo in endothelial cells, the available
data indicate that great care is needed in interpreting the
arrangement of actin and its molecular regulation by
adherens junctions in vivo both in resting and activated
endothelium.
Nevertheless, endothelial adherens junctions seem to
be equipped with the molecular components to regulate
actin polymerization and actomyosin contraction. The
results of Millan et al. [1] suggest that local tuning of the
actin cytoskeleton at adherens junction subdomains
could allow endothelial cells in the monolayer to behave
as a functional unit, withstanding the stress of continuous
changes in blood flow that take place in the organism and
also locally restricting the stress of junctional and actin
rearrangements that occur during inflammation,
leukocyte transmigration and angiogenic responses.
Published: 8 April 2010
References
1.	 Millan J, Cain RJ, Reglero-Real N, Bigarella C, Marcos-Ramiro B, FernandezMartin L, Correas I, Ridley AJ: Adherens junctions connect stress fibers
between adjacent endothelial cells. BMC Biol 2010, 8:11.
2.	 Cai Y, Sheetz MP: Force propagation across cells: mechanical coherence of
dynamic cytoskeletons. Curr Opin Cell Biol 2009, 21:47-50.

Page 4 of 4

3.	
4.	
5.	
6.	
7.	
8.	
9.	
10.	

11.	

12.	

13.	
14.	

15.	
16.	
17.	

Dejana E, Orsenigo F, Lampugnani MG: The role of adherens junctions and
VE-cadherin in the control of vascular permeability. J Cell Sci 2008,
121:2115-2122.
Ridley AJ: Rho GTPases and actin dynamics in membrane protrusions and
vesicle trafficking. Trends Cell Biol 2006, 16:522-529.
Niessen CM, Gottardi CJ: Molecular components of the adherens junction.
Biochim Biophys Acta 2008, 1778:562-571.
Pokutta S, Drees F, Yamada S, Nelson WJ, Weis WI: Biochemical and structural
analysis of alpha-catenin in cell-cell contacts. Biochem Soc Trans 2008,
36:141-147.
Samarin S, Nusrat A: Regulation of epithelial apical junctional complex by
Rho family GTPases. Front Biosci 2009, 14:1129-1142.
Pannekoek WJ, Kooistra MR, Zwartkruis FJ, Bos JL: Cell-cell junction
formation: the role of Rap1 and Rap1 guanine nucleotide exchange
factors. Biochim Biophys Acta 2009, 1788:790-796.
Glading A, Han J, Stockton RA, Ginsberg MH: KRIT-1/CCM1 is a Rap1 effector
that regulates endothelial cell cell junctions. J Cell Biol 2007, 179:247-254.
Sakurai A, Fukuhara S, Yamagishi A, Sako K, Kamioka Y, Masuda M, Nakaoka Y,
Mochizuki N: MAGI-1 is required for Rap1 activation upon cell-cell contact
and for enhancement of vascular endothelial cadherin-mediated cell
adhesion. Mol Biol Cell 2006, 17:966-976.
Wildenberg GA, Dohn MR, Carnahan RH, Davis MA, Lobdell NA, Settleman J,
Reynolds AB: p120-catenin and p190RhoGAP regulate cell-cell adhesion
by coordinating antagonism between Rac and Rho. Cell 2006,
127:1027-1039.
Whitehead KJ, Chan AC, Navankasattusas S, Koh W, London NR, Ling J, Mayo
AH, Drakos SG, Jones CA, Zhu W, Marchuk DA, Davis GE, Li DY: The cerebral
cavernous malformation signaling pathway promotes vascular integrity
via Rho GTPases. Nat Med 2009, 15:177-184.
Labauge P, Denier C, Bergametti F, Tournier-Lasserve E: Genetics of
cavernous angiomas. Lancet Neurol 2007, 6:237-244.
Baluk P, Fuxe J, Hashizume H, Romano T, Lashnits E, Butz S, Vestweber D,
Corada M, Molendini C, Dejana E, McDonald DM: Functionally specialized
junctions between endothelial cells of lymphatic vessels. J Exp Med 2007,
204:2349-2362.
Nehls V, Drenckhahn D: Demonstration of actin filament stress fibers in
microvascular endothelial cells in situ. Microvasc Res 1991, 42:103-112.
Thurston G, Baldwin AL, Wilson LM: Changes in endothelial actin
cytoskeleton at leakage sites in the rat mesenteric microvasculature. Am J
Physiol 1995, 268:H316-329.
Lampugnani, MG, Orsenigo F, Rudini N, Maddaluno L, Boulday G, Chapon F,
Dejana E: CCM1 regulates vasacular-lumen organization by inducing
endothelial polarity. J Cell Sci 2010, in press.

doi:10.1186/jbiol232
Cite this article as: Lampugnani MG: Endothelial adherens junctions and
the actin cytoskeleton: an‘infinity net’? Journal of Biology 2010, 9:16.

