Minireview

Coordinated gene expression by post-transcriptional regulons in
African trypanosomes
Marc Ouellette and Barbara Papadopoulou
Addresses: Centre de Recherche en Infectiologie and Département de Microbiologie-Infectiologie et Immunologie, Université Laval, Québec,
G1V 4G2, Canada.
Correspondence: Marc Ouellette. Email: Marc.Ouellette@crchul.ulaval.ca. Barbara Papadopoulou.
Email: barbara.papadopoulou@crchul.ulaval.ca.

Abstract
The regulation of gene expression in trypanosomes is unique. In
the absence of transcriptional control at the level of initiation, a
subset of Trypanosoma brucei genes form post-transcriptional
regulons in which mRNAs are co-regulated in response to differentiation signals.
See research articles http://www.biomedcentral.com/14712164/10/427, http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/10/482
and http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/10/495.

The kinetoplastid parasites diverged early in the eukaryotic
branch of life and several of their members are responsible
for some of the great scourges of humanity, including
sleeping sickness (caused by Trypanosoma brucei), Chagas
disease (caused by Trypanosoma cruzi) and leishmaniasis
(caused by Leishmania species). These parasites are distinguished by the kinetoplast, the dense DNA-containing
region inside the single large mitochondrion. Because of
their medical and veterinary importance, these parasites
have been intensively investigated and their study has led
to the discovery of a number of novel basic mechanisms,
including trans-splicing, RNA editing, glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchoring of membrane proteins, and the
polarization of T-cell subsets in immunology. The regulation of gene expression in these early-diverging eukaryotes
displays some unique features. The findings of three papers
published recently in BMC Genomics [1-3] show that
despite a lack of transcriptional control at the level of
initiation, the expression of subsets of genes in T. brucei is
regulated during differentiation in a coordinated fashion at
the post-transcriptional level. This leads to ‘post-transcriptional regulons’, a phenomenon recently recognized in
many organisms (reviewed in [4]) and proposed to exist in
T. brucei [5,6].

Constitutive RNA polymerase-II-mediated
transcription in kinetoplastids
The ‘TriTryp’ (Leishmania species, T. brucei and T. cruzi)
genomes are organized into large gene clusters that are
constitutively co-transcribed by RNA polymerase II (Pol II)

http://jbiol.com/content/8/11/100

to yield polycistronic pre-mRNAs - that is, RNA containing
multiple protein-coding sequences [7]. In contrast to the
DNA operons of prokaryotes, however, there is no evidence
of functional clustering within these polycistronic transcription units.
These polycistronic pre-mRNAs are processed by two
coupled cleavage reactions - a trans-splicing reaction that
adds a capped spliced leader RNA of 39 nucleotides to the
5' terminus of all the known protein-coding RNAs, and
3'-polyadenylation (Figure 1). This unusual mechanism of
generating mature mRNAs precludes individual regulation
of gene expression at the level of initiation of transcription.
Pol II promoters are indeed elusive in these parasites and
sequence analysis has revealed a paucity of the basal Pol II
transcription factors in their genomes [7].
The regions between polycistronic units are known as
strand-switch regions (SSRs). Depending on the transcriptional orientation, the units can be convergent
(transcriptional operons on opposite strands are converging towards the SSRs) or divergent (transcriptional
operons start on opposite strands of the SSRs and diverge
from one another) (Figure 1). SSRs associated with divergent units in Leishmania have been shown to be preferential sites of transcription initiation, whereas convergent
SSRs were enriched for transcription termination sites [8].
Recent chromatin immunoprecipitation and sequencing
(ChIP-seq) experiments examining the genome-wide
distribution of chromatin components in T. brucei showed
that the seemingly unregulated transcription of trypanosomes is directed by histone post-translational modifications, thus indicating the important role that chromatin
modifications play in polycistronic transcription initiation
and termination [9]. While divergent SSRs were indeed
found to be potential transcription start sites, many other
start sites were also pinpointed, often downstream of tRNA
genes [9] (Figure 1). While we refrain from putting
T. brucei and Leishmania under the same regulatory
umbrella, it is intriguing to note that histone modifications
were also found in divergent SSRs in Leishmania [10],

Ouellette and Papadopoulou: Journal of Biology 2009, 8:100

100.2

Polycistronic transcription
<<< //

//
P1

P2

AAA

AAA

//

<<< //

P1

Mature mRNAs

>>>

P2

P1

AAA

AAA

>>>

AAA

Direction of RNA pol II transcription
ORFs
Co-regulated genes

tRNAgenes
39-nt spliced leader (SL)
AAA

poly(A) tail
5’UTR
3’UTR

Relative expression ratio

Histone modifications / transcription termination

Relative expression ratio

Histone modifications / transcription initiation

Putative common regulatory elements
Putative
trans-acting
factors
Ribonucleoprotein
complexes

Time (hrs)

Time (hrs)

Figure 1
Coordinated post-transcriptional regulation of T. brucei mRNAs during differentiation. Schematic diagram of putative regions of two T. brucei
chromosomes. Genes in T. brucei are organized into long polycistronic clusters that are co-transcribed by RNA polymerase II (Pol II) to yield
polycistronic pre-mRNAs, which are processed by trans-splicing (addition of a capped spliced leader RNA of 39 nucleotides to the 5'
terminus of transcripts) and 3'-polyadenylation to generate mature mRNAs. Transcription initiates from divergent strand-switch regions
(SSRs) and terminates at convergent SSRs, where tRNA genes are often located (although they can be present at non-SSRs). Initiation and
termination of transcription in T. brucei are characterized by distinct chromatin variants and modifications [9]. Three recent reports [1-3]
indicate that subsets of trypanosome genes form post-transcriptional regulons during T. brucei life-cycle transitions. Two hypothetical posttranscriptional regulons formed during differentiation are shown. Subsets of genes (here shown in either orange or violet) have common
regulatory elements or conserved secondary structures within the 3'UTRs. These are recognized by trans-acting factors (specific for either
the set of genes in orange or in violet, and either stabilizing or destabilizing mRNAs), which allow a coordinated regulation of sets of mRNAs.
This is illustrated in the two lower graphs, where mRNA levels are plotted against the differentiation process with time. The mRNA levels of
the cluster of genes in orange are increasing coordinately upon differentiation, whereas the cluster of genes in violet are decreasing upon
differentiation in a coordinated fashion.

although additional sites outside SSRs were also identified.
Altogether, these findings support the view that transcription in kinetoplastid parasites is constitutive and that
chromatin structure, in part mediated through histone
modifications, will determine transcription start and
termination sites. These do not seem to be sequencespecific and several of these sites (but clearly not all) are
within SSRs.

Post-transcriptional control of gene
expression in kinetoplastids
Kinetoplastid parasites have relatively complex life cycles
during which they undergo extensive developmental changes.

http://jbiol.com/content/8/11/100

T. brucei cycles between the bloodstream of mammalian
hosts and the tsetse fly vector. This cycling is accompanied
by changes in morphology, in metabolism, and in RNA and
protein expression. Because the genome of T. brucei is
transcribed mostly constitutively, as previously described,
regulation of gene expression occurs almost exclusively by
post-transcriptional mechanisms. These include mRNA
processing, mRNA degradation and translational efficiency, and protein processing, modification and stability
[11]. Several studies have reported that sequences within
3'-untranslated regions (3'UTRs) play a key role in
controlling either the stability of kinetoplastid mRNAs or
the efficiency of their translation [11].

Ouellette and Papadopoulou: Journal of Biology 2009, 8:100

100.3

Within the mammalian bloodstream, trypanosomes grow
as long slender forms. When parasitemia reaches a
threshold, trypanosomes transform into a quiescent short
stumpy form. Within the tsetse fly vector, this quiescent
form rapidly transforms into procyclic parasites in the
insect midgut. These transform further into epimastigote
and metacyclic forms within the insect. The three recent
BMC Genomics papers by Kabani and colleagues [1],
Jensen and colleagues [2], and Queiroz and colleagues [3]
have taken advantage of whole-genome oligonucleotidebased DNA microarrays to study the changes in mRNA
levels during the important T. brucei life-cycle transitions
from long and slender to short and stumpy, and thereafter
from stumpy to tsetse-midgut procyclics [1-3].
Previous transcriptomic analyses revealed that only a small
proportion (2 to 5%) of mRNAs were modulated throughout the life cycle of T. brucei, and that this paralleled
observations in the related Leishmania (reviewed in [11]).
However, the data reported by Jensen and colleagues [2]
now suggest that expression of up to 25% of the coding
RNAs varies in at least one part of the parasite’s life cycle.
These numbers are clearly higher than earlier reports,
although significant variation was observed among the
three new studies [1-3]. These variations could partly be
accounted by the fold-threshold changes used as a criterion
for change, as the studies by Jensen et al. [2] and Queiroz
et al. [3], which retained smaller-fold change criteria,
found greater numbers of differentially expressed genes. It
remains to be determined whether small changes in mRNA
levels will impact on protein production and activity, but
this new work [1-3] gives eloquent examples of changes in
mRNA levels correlated with changes in protein or
metabolite levels. Even more remarkable is the observation
that the expression of several of the differentially expressed
genes was modulated post-transcriptionally in a
coordinated fashion.

Post-transcriptional regulons
Post-transcriptional mechanisms of regulation can
influence splicing, transport, stability, localization, and
translation of messenger RNAs. This post-transcriptional
regulation is mediated by trans-acting factors (proteins,
RNAs and metabolites) that recognize cis-acting sequences
or structures, usually within the 3'UTRs of mRNAs. If a
protein were to recognize a group of mRNAs containing
the same sequences in their 3'UTRs, hence modulating the
stability of this group of mRNAs in a coordinated fashion,
it would lead to a post-transcriptional regulon (reviewed in
[4]). Post-transcriptional regulons have been described in
budding yeast, fruit fly and mammalian cells [4], and
possibly the best-studied examples are the Pumilio RNAbinding protein family members (PUFs) in yeast. Indeed,
each yeast PUF was found to bind and destabilize a distinct
subset of mRNAs coding for proteins with related functions
[12]. As kinetoplastids rely exclusively on post-transcriptional

http://jbiol.com/content/8/11/100

mechanisms, post-transcriptional regulons are likely
candidates for gene regulation in these parasites. Recent
studies have indeed provided evidence for this concept
[5,6] and the three BMC Genomics papers [1-3] show the
potential for many additional putative post-transcriptional
regulons in T. brucei.
These new discoveries were rendered possible by a number
of technological improvements (DNA microarrays and
stringent statistical analyses) and more sophisticated
experimental design (involving defined parasite genetic
lines, larger numbers of biological replicates, and careful
monitoring of the time course of parasite differentiation).
The level of co-regulation of some T. brucei genes was
striking and several clusters of coordinated gene expression were highlighted. Most clusters contained genes with
a variety of functions, although some co-regulated genes
were functionally related. These observations further
supported the notion that despite an absence of control of
transcriptional initiation, gene expression can be finely
tuned through post-transcriptional mechanisms during the
T. brucei life cycle. Several of the co-regulated clusters
were logical and consistent with the biology of the parasite.
Indeed, despite non-identical experimental set-ups between
the three studies [1-3], a number of common observations
were made (although admittedly, many differences were
also apparent). For example, the RNAs of genes coding for
proteins involved in the translational machinery were
coordinately downregulated during the transition from long
slender to short stumpy bloodstream forms, but their
expression increased en bloc on transformation from short
stumpy to procyclics [1-3]. Within some of the clusters, there
were many genes of unknown function co-regulated with
genes of known function. This clustering can lead to testable
hypotheses for examining the role of hypothetical genes.

Regulatory factors of post-transcriptional
regulons
Post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression
networks is a ribonucleoprotein-driven process, in which
the levels of subsets of mRNAs are coordinately regulated,
primarily by trans-acting factors. These factors interact
with regulatory elements that are shared between the
co-regulated mRNAs (Figure 1). Searches for shared motifs
in clusters of co-regulated genes in T. brucei met with
limited success [2,3], with the exception of the transcripts
upregulated in stumpy forms, which were greatly enriched
for a hexamer sequence 150 nucleotides downstream of the
translation stop codon [1]. The role of this sequence awaits
further experimental testing, but if it is involved in
coordinated gene expression, it could be used to isolate the
putative trans-acting factors. One such factor, PUF9, was
recently isolated along with its putative cis-acting sequence,
a heptamer contained in the 3'UTRs of several T. brucei
mRNAs [6]. PUF9 was shown to stabilize targeted mRNAs
in the S-phase of the cell cycle, and these mRNAs would

Ouellette and Papadopoulou: Journal of Biology 2009, 8:100

100.4

constitute a post-transcriptional regulon involved in the
replicative process.
Interestingly, genes encoding RNA-binding proteins were
often found in the clusters of co-regulated genes and, as
suggested in [3], some of these proteins might regulate the
expression of genes that are part of the regulon. In contrast
to Leishmania species and T. cruzi, RNA interference
(RNAi) functions well in T. brucei, and this technique can
be used at a genome-wide scale. By silencing genes coding
for putative RNA-binding proteins and using microarrays
to look for post-transcriptional regulons during differentiation (or other biological processes), it should be possible
to isolate trans-acting factors involved in post-transcriptional control of gene expression. Genome analysis has
revealed that kinetoplastid parasites have an unusually
large repertoire of genes coding for RNA-binding proteins
[7], which is consistent with organisms relying on posttranscriptional mechanisms for gene regulation.
Control of gene expression in kinetoplastid parasites is
unique, and relies exclusively on post-transcriptional
mechanisms. Recent papers have now indicated that in
T. brucei differentiation, some of the regulation is highly
coordinated. Genes involved in processes other than differentiation might possibly also be regulated by coordinated
RNA stability, as shown for the T. brucei replication
process [6]. It is also likely that the regulation of many
other genes will be at the translational or post-translational
level. Trypanosomes and the related Leishmania species
depend on the dynamics of gene expression to regulate
differentiation, adaptation to stress, and proliferation in
response to diverse environmental signals within different
hosts.
It remains to be seen whether T. cruzi and Leishmania
species, whose genomes are highly syntenic (that is, similar
in the order of the genes) with T. brucei [7], will use similar
strategies for regulating mRNA levels. A recent transcriptomic analysis has shown that about 50% of T. cruzi
genes are differentially expressed during development [13],
but several reports from Leishmania did not suggest such
extensive changes (reviewed in [11]). Recent evidence,
however, would suggest that many Leishmania genes are
regulated post-transcriptionally by small degenerate
inactive retroposons (SIDER1 and SIDER2) in their
3'UTRs (reviewed in [11]).
Kinetoplastid parasites have a proven record in generating
novel concepts involved in the regulation of gene expression. The quasi-exclusive dependence on post-transcriptional mechanisms for coordinated gene expression makes
T. brucei an interesting model system for deciphering
mechanisms governing the generation of post-transcriptional regulons. In the mid-term, this work may also

http://jbiol.com/content/8/11/100

lead to novel urgently required therapeutic targets and
strategies for controlling important human diseases caused
by these deadly parasites.

Acknowledgements
Work in the labs of MO and BP is funded by the Canadian Institutes
of Health Research (CIHR). MO and BO are Burroughs Welcome
Fund investigators and MO is the holder of a Canada Research
Chair.

References
1.

2.

3.

4.
5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

Kabani S, Fenn K, Ross A, Ivens A, Smith TK, Ghazal P,
Matthews K: Genome-wide expression profiling of in vivoderived bloodstream parasite stages and dynamic analysis
of mRNA alterations during synchronous differentiation in
Trypanosoma brucei. BMC Genomics 2009, 10:427.
Jensen BC, Sivam D, Kifer CT, Myler PJ, Parsons M:
Widespread variation in transcript abundance within and
across developmental stages of Trypanosoma brucei. BMC
Genomics 2009, 10:482.
Queiroz R, Benz C, Fellenberg K, Hoheisel JD, Clayton C:
Transcriptome analysis of differentiating trypanosomes
reveals the existence of multiple post-transcriptional regulons. BMC Genomics 2009, 10:495.
Keene JD: RNA regulons: coordination of post-transcriptional events. Nat Rev Genet 2007, 8:533-543.
Estevez AM: The RNA-binding protein TbDRBD3 regulates
the stability of a specific subset of mRNAs in trypanosomes. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:4573-4586.
Archer SK, Luu VD, de Queiroz RA, Brems S, Clayton C:
Trypanosoma brucei PUF9 regulates mRNAs for proteins
involved in replicative processes over the cell cycle. PLoS
Pathog 2009, 5:e1000565.
Ivens AC, Peacock CS, Worthey EA, Murphy L, Aggarwal G,
Berriman M, Sisk E, Rajandream MA, Adlem E, Aert R,
Anupama A, Apostolou Z, Attipoe P, Bason N, Bauser C, Beck
A, Beverley SM, Bianchettin G, Borzym K, Bothe G, Bruschi
CV, Collins M, Cadag E, Ciarloni L, Clayton C, Coulson RM,
Cronin A, Cruz AK, Davies RM, De Gaudenzi J, et al.: The
genome of the kinetoplastid parasite, Leishmania major.
Science 2005, 309:436-442.
Martinez-Calvillo S, Yan S, Nguyen D, Fox M, Stuart K, Myler
PJ: Transcription of Leishmania major Friedlin chromosome 1 initiates in both directions within a single region.
Mol Cell 2003, 11:1291-1299.
Siegel TN, Hekstra DR, Kemp LE, Figueiredo LM, Lowell JE,
Fenyo D, Wang X, Dewell S, Cross GA: Four histone variants
mark the boundaries of polycistronic transcription units in
Trypanosoma brucei. Genes Dev 2009, 23:1063-1076.
Thomas S, Green A, Sturm NR, Campbell DA, Myler PJ:
Histone acetylations mark origins of polycistronic transcription in Leishmania major. BMC Genomics 2009, 10:
152.
Haile S, Papadopoulou B: Developmental regulation of gene
expression in trypanosomatid parasitic protozoa. Curr Opin
Microbiol 2007, 10:569-577.
Gerber AP, Herschlag D, Brown PO: Extensive association of
functionally and cytotopically related mRNAs with Puf
family RNA-binding proteins in yeast. PLoS Biol 2004, 2:
E79.
Minning TA, Weatherly DB, Atwood J 3rd, Orlando R, Tarleton
RL: The steady-state transcriptome of the four major lifecycle stages of Trypanosoma cruzi. BMC Genomics 2009,
10:370.

Published: 14 December 2009
doi:10.1186/jbiol203
© 2009 BioMed Central Ltd

Ouellette and Papadopoulou: Journal of Biology 2009, 8:100

