Palmer Journal of Biology 2010, 9:11
http://jbiol.com/content/9/2/11

MINIREVIEW

Scale-eating cichlids: from hand(ed) to mouth
A Richard Palmer*
See research article http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/8.

Abstract
Two recent studies in BMC Biology and Evolution
raise important questions about a textbook case of
frequency-dependent selection in scale-eating cichlid
fishes. They also suggest a fascinating new line of
research testing the effects of handed behavior on
morphological asymmetry.

The twisted smiles of left- and right-bending scale-eating
cichlids (Figure 1) have achieved near-legendary status
among evolutionary biologists since their explosion onto
the scene in 1993 [1]. As more data have accumulated,
though, the story has become both more interesting and
decidedly more puzzling. Two recent papers, by Stewart
and Albertson in BMC Biology [2] and Van Dooren et al.
in Evolution [3], add valuable new perspectives, including
the exciting possibility that handed behavior may amplify
mouth asymmetry during growth. But these and other
studies also raise important questions about this textbook
case of frequency-dependent selection.
The original story [1] is inescapably seductive because
it ‘makes sense’ and is easy to tell. Perissodus microlepis is
a specialized scale-eater from Lake Tanganyika that nips
scales oﬀ the posterior ﬂanks of larger prey ﬁsh. Their
mouths bend to one side of the head, which allows them
to strike from a more posterior orientation that makes
them less visible to intended victims. Mouths bend to the
right in some individuals and to the left in others, and a
single locus, two-allele polymorphism is thought to control
the direction of mouth-bending, with right bending being
dominant. Finally, frequencies of right- and left-bending
individuals appear to vary cyclically around 50:50 over
time, as if negative frequency-dependent selection were
maintaining this polymorphism. So, the logic goes, when
right-bending individuals become more common,

*Correspondence: rich.palmer@ualberta.ca
Systematics and Evolution Group, Department of Biological Sciences, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2E9, Canada

© 2010 BioMed Central Ltd

© 2010 BioMed Central Ltd

Figure 1. Conspicuously asymmetrical left-bending (left) and
right-bending (right) individuals of the scale-eating cichlid fish
Perissodus microlepis from Lake Tanganyika. (Photo courtesy of
A Meyer.)

potential victims are thought to become more watchful
of their left sides, thereby increasing the feeding success
and therefore the ﬁtness of the rarer, left-bending
individuals. It’s a lovely package.
But puzzling results regarding the extent of mouth
bending in adults and juveniles, and its genetic basis,
have emerged from several subsequent studies. So the
real story may not be so simple.

Extent of mouth-bending in adults and juveniles
Diﬀerences between right- and left-bending morphs of
adult P. microlepis can sometimes be dramatic (Figure 1).
However, careful geometric morphometric analyses of
head and jaw asymmetry by Stewart and Albertson [2]
and Van Dooren et al. [3] suggest that the diﬀerences are
more quantitative than qualitative. These new results
help to explain why a revision of the genus Perissodus
reported conspicuous asymmetry in only one species,
P. eccentricus (thought at the time to be a sister species to
P. microlepis [4]), and are also consistent with earlier

Palmer Journal of Biology 2010, 9:11
http://jbiol.com/content/9/2/11

quantitative evidence for subtle (2-3%) and more
continuous variation in mouth asymmetry [5].
Among six species of scale-eating cichlids, including
P. microlepis, geometric morphometric measures of overall
head-shape asymmetry (when viewed laterally) were only
signiﬁcant in adults of one of the two most derived species,
P. straeleni [2]. Measurements of lower jaw mechanical
advantage diﬀered between right- and left-bending forms
in the two most derived scale-eaters, but these diﬀerences
were only marginally signiﬁcant for three of the four tests.
So, although the four most derived species eat scales
almost exclusively, the statistical signal for asymmetry in
the heads and jaws of adults appears surprisingly weak.
Similarly, when viewed from above, the mouth-bending
angle also appears to be less discrete than generally
believed [3]. Careful head-orientation measures of live,
adult P. microlepis conﬁrmed that some bent towards the
right and others to the left. But the frequency distribution
of asymmetry values was only weakly bimodal, with
modes corresponding to bending angles of 2-3 degrees.
Here again, right and left bending did not appear to be
discrete states in adults, and more then 10% of individuals
were nearly symmetrical (mouth bend less than 1 degree).
As Van Dooren et al. note “mouth bend asymmetry is
diﬃcult to determine by visual inspection alone” [3].
Finally, temporal variation in the proportions of leftand right-bending P. microlepis is much less pronounced
than generally believed. Unlike for total population size,
where a conﬁdence limit is diﬃcult to estimate, conﬁdence limits to the proportions of right- and left-bending
individuals within a sample are easily obtained from a
binomial distribution. Of 13 samples taken over an
11-year period (see Figure 2A of [1]), only two approached
statistical signiﬁcance. Furthermore, in all three
populations where two samples were taken concurrently,
one yielded an excess of left-bending individuals and the
other a deﬁcit. In other words, variation among samples,
and therefore among years, was not signiﬁcantly greater
than expected due to simple sampling error.
Mouth-bending is even less pronounced in juvenile
P.  microlepis. The quantitative analyses of head-bending
variation among brooded oﬀspring from a single female
[2] yielded two puzzling observations. First, “only 93 (of
141) animals showed unambiguous jaw laterality”. Second,
although some individuals departed from symmetry by
several degrees, the distribution of jaw bending angles
was clearly unimodal and centered on zero (see Figure 4C
of [2]). If two alleles at a single locus induce discrete
right- and left-bending morphs [1,6], then two questions
arise. Why do Stewart and Albertson [2] ﬁnd that so
many juveniles (close to one-third) exhibit no signiﬁcant
mouth bending? And why does asymmetry in juveniles
not materialize as a bimodal distribution of right-left
diﬀerences?

Page 2 of 4

The genetics of mouth bending
To complicate matters further, the genetic basis of
mouth-bending has become more rather than less
puzzling as more data accumulate. Two alleles, R and L,
at a single locus are thought to direct bending to the right
or the left, respectively [1,6]. But two conﬂicting models
have been advanced. The ﬁrst is a simple model where R
is dominant [1] (Figure 2, Model I), whereas the second is
a more complex model, where R is both dominant and
homozygous lethal [6] (Figure 2, Model II). Neither
model ﬁts all the data. Published oﬀspring frequencies
from four crosses are inconsistent with Model I (Figure 2,
orange and blue boxes,) and those from six crosses are
inconsistent with Model II (Figure 2, yellow and blue
boxes). Furthermore, none of the pooled results from the
original study [1] (Figure 2a) is consistent with Model II,
a model where RR homozygotes are lethal so all rightbending parents must be heterozygotes.
Additional puzzling results emerge from two genetic
marker studies. In the ﬁrst, Stewart and Albertson [2]
measured mouth asymmetry quantitatively in juveniles
and genotyped them for two microsatellite markers, A
and B, putatively linked to right-bending (R) and leftbending (L) alleles, respectively. Their results are not
consistent with either of the proposed genetic models.
First, nearly half of left-bending juveniles (20 of 45)
carried marker A, a result inconsistent with the dominance of allele R. Second, nearly 10% of individuals (9 of
93), regardless of mouth bend, were homozygous for
marker A, a result inconsistent with RR lethality (Figure 2,
Model II). Third, over 12% of right-bending juveniles (6
of 48) were homozygous for marker B, a result inconsistent with being homozygous recessive for allele L.
Finally, although both parents of this brood were inferred
to be heterozygotes, and other microsatellite evidence
pointed to a single male parent, equal frequencies of rightand left-bending oﬀspring are not consistent with either
Model I or II (Figure 2c). In the second genetic marker
study, which used both nuclear and mitochondrial DNA
markers, Lee et al. [7] report widespread interbreeding
between right- and left-bending morphs, consistent with
random mating. However, these results are not consistent
with the predictions of Model II [6], or with published
reports [8], that right-bending males should or do prefer to
mate with left-bending females and vice versa
(disassortative mating) because RR homozygotes are lethal.
Oﬀspring frequencies are also inconsistent with two
other possible models (Figure 2). Cichlid mouth asymmetry might be inherited like visceral asymmetry in mice
[9] (that is, like left-right asymmetry of internal organs
such as the heart), where a dominant allele causes mouth
bending towards one side but a recessive allele yields
random phenotypes (equal numbers of right and left)
(Figure 2, Model III). Alternatively, the direction of

Palmer Journal of Biology 2010, 9:11
http://jbiol.com/content/9/2/11

Page 3 of 4

Parent phenotypes

R×R

R×L

L×L

Reference

F1 proportions

(a) Pooled:

R:L
23:2
35:11
39:15
97:28

R:L
74:0
18:2
55:53
27:29
174:84

R:L
0:79
0:29
1:19
15:79
12:28
28:234

[1]
[1]
[1]
[1]
[1]
[1]

(b) Pooled:

71:40
228:118
95:37
149:66
99:46
67:38
709:385

65:59
44:36
65:71
186:201
80:86
66:83
506:536

0:263
0:76
0:140
0:479

[6]
[6]
[6]
[6]
[6]
[6]
[6]

(c) Total:

48:45

-

-

[2]

Expected proportions

R:L

R:L

R:L

Model I: two alleles (R, L), R
dominant, no lethality

1:0
(if RR x RL)
3:1
(if RL x RL)

1:0
(if RR x LL)
1:1
(if RL x LL)

0:1

[1]

Model II: two alleles (R, L),
R dominant, RR lethal

2:1

1:1

0:1

[6]

Model III: two alleles (R, N),
R dominant, and N is random

1:0
(if RR x RN)
7:1
(if RN x RN)

3:1
(if RN x NN)
1:0
(if RR x NN)

1:1
(if NN x NN)

Model IV: head-bend
direction is random

1:1

1:1

1:1

Figure 2. Parent phenotypes, offspring phenotypes, and expected frequencies of right-bending (R) and left-bending (L) forms of
the scale-eating cichlid fish Perissodus microlepis. Each box represents offspring from a single cross (except rows (a) and (b), where results
are pooled from all crosses in that study). Offspring were obtained as broods defended by brooding parents in the field. Parent and offspring
phenotypes were scored visually, except in row (c) where offspring phenotypes were measured and parent phenotypes inferred from putative
microsatellite markers for right- and left-bending. Colors indicate statistically significant departures from expectations for Model I (orange box),
Model II (yellow box), or both Models I and II (blue box). Parent phenotypes follow the original convention of Hori [1], who referred to right- and
left-bending as dextral and sinistral. This convention differs from [2], who follow the later convention of referring to right-bending fish as ‘lefties’
because they attack prey from the left side [6]. In regard to Model II, if the RR genotype is lethal as proposed in [6], then all right-bending parents (R)
must be RL heterozygotes.

asymmetry might be purely random and not inherited at
all, as observed in 27 of 28 cases of random asymmetries
in other organisms (Model IV) [10]. Left-bending
oﬀspring from two right-bending parents are either too
common for model III or too few for Model IV (9 of 10
crosses in both cases; Figure 2). Similarly, right-bending
oﬀspring from two left-bending parents are too few for
either Model III or IV (Figure 2).

Unfortunately, direction of mouth-bending of both
parents and oﬀspring was scored by eye in all but one cross
(that in Figure 2c), even though mouth-bending angles can
be diﬃcult to detect in adults [3] and are so small as to be
‘ambiguous’ in more than one-third of fry measured [2]. So
the validity of these oﬀspring frequencies is hard to judge.
Clearly, more studies like that of Stewart and Albertson [2]
are needed to resolve these unsettling inconsistencies.

Page 4 of 4

Palmer Journal of Biology 2010, 9:11
http://jbiol.com/content/9/2/11

Handed behavior and morphological asymmetry
Despite the questions raised above, these recent studies
[2,3] suggest an exciting new dimension to the scaleeating cichlid story. Handed or lateralized behavior may
amplify morphological asymmetry via developmental
plasticity [11]. Handed behavior seems strong and
repeatable in these ﬁsh [1,3]. Hints that it may inﬂuence
morphological asymmetry in P. microlepis come from
several sources. First, mouth asymmetry increases with
increasing body size [6], as would be expected if repeated
lateralized behavior induced greater mouth asymmetry
over time. Second, the frequency distribution of mouth
asymmetry is not bimodal in brooded juveniles that have
not yet begun to feed on scales, suggesting that scaleeating itself may amplify morphological asymmetry later
in life [2]. Third, mouth asymmetry of ﬁsh forced
experimentally to attack prey from their non-preferred
side tended to become less pronounced over time,
whereas it increased in those allowed to attack from their
preferred side [3]. Fourth, the stronger the lateralized
behavior of individual ﬁsh, the more pronounced the
mouth asymmetry [3]. Finally, cichlids, and many other
ﬁsh, exhibit plastic jaw form that responds to the diet
they experience [12]: side of attack may therefore matter
just as much as kind of prey eaten.
Several puzzling aspects of the scale-eating cichlid
story could therefore be more easily explained if mouth
asymmetry is actually induced or ampliﬁed by lateralized
behavior. However, some intriguing questions remain.
Does consistency of lateralized behavior increase with
increasing body size, as expected if individuals learn to
become more proﬁcient at attacking one side with
increasing age? Does lateralized behavior or mouth
asymmetry of ﬁsh reared in the laboratory on a diet of
free-ﬂoating scales become less pronounced compared to
ﬁsh consistently forced to obtain scales by striking the
sides of their prey, as expected if lateralized behaviors are
learned and morphological asymmetry is ampliﬁed by
lateralized behavior? Do oﬀspring from left-bending
parents exhibit a greater tendency to attack the right
sides of their prey even before mouth asymmetry
becomes pronounced, as expected if greater genetic
variation exists for the degree of lateralized behavior [13]
than for the degree of morphological asymmetry? Do
those individuals that attack prey consistently from one
side obtain more scales than those that sometimes attack

from the right or left, as expected if learned behavior
improves feeding performance?
As these examples show, studies of right-left asymmetries oﬀer valuable clues about how development
evolves because the questions are clear and tests of
developmental mechanisms are possible in many diﬀerent organisms [10].
Acknowledgements
The freedom to study many aspects of biological asymmetries has been
generously supported by NSERC Canada (Discovery Grant A7245) and a
sabbatical leave from the University of Alberta.
Published: 24 February 2010
References
1. Hori M: Frequency-dependent natural selection in the handedness of
scale-eating cichlid ﬁsh. Science 1993, 260:216-219.
2. Stewart TA, Albertson RC: Evolution of a unique predatory feeding
apparatus: Functional anatomy, development and a genetic locus for jaw
laterality in Lake Tanganyika scale-eating cichlids. BMC Biol 2010, 8:8.
3. Van Dooren TJ, van Goor HA, van Putten M: Handedness and asymmetry in
scale-eating cichlids: antisymmetries of diﬀerent strength. Evolution 2010,
doi:10.1111/j.1558-5646.2010.00977.x .
4. Liem KF, Stewart DJ: Evolution of the scale eating cichlid ﬁshes of Lake
Tanganyika: A generic revision with a description of a new species. Bull
Mus Comp Zool, Harvard 1976, 147:319-350.
5. Hori M: Feeding relationships among cichlid ﬁshes in Lake Tanganyika:
Eﬀects of intra- and interspeciﬁc variations of feeding behavior on their
coexistence. Ecol Int Bull 1991, 19:89-101.
6. Hori M, Ochi H, Kohda M: Inheritance pattern of lateral dimorphism in two
cichlids (a scale eater, Perissodus microlepis, and an herbivore,
Neolamprologus moorii) in Lake Tanganyika. Zool Sci 2007, 24:486-492.
7. Lee HJ, Pittlik S, Jones JC, Salzburger W, Barluenga M, Meyer A: Genetic
support for random mating between left and right mouth-morphs in the
dimorphic scale-eating cichlid ﬁsh, Perissodus microlepis, from Lake
Tanganyika. J Fish Biol 2010, in press.
8. Takahashi T, Hori M: Evidence of disassortative mating in a Tanganyikan
cichlid ﬁsh and its role in the maintenance of intrapopulation
dimorphism. Biol Lett 2008, 4:497-499.
9. Hummel KP, Chapman DB: Visceral inversion and associated anomalies in
the mouse. J Hered 1959, 50:9-13.
10. Palmer AR: Symmetry breaking and the evolution of development. Science
2004, 306:828-833.
11. Neufeld CJ, Palmer AR: Learning, developmental plasticity, and the rate of
morphological evolution. In: Epigenetics: Linking Genotype and Phenotype in
Development and Evolution. Edited by Hallgrímsson B, Hall BK. San Francisco:
University of California Press; 2010.
12. Meyer A: Phenotypic plasticity and heterochrony in Cichlasoma
managuense (Pisces, Cichlidae) and their implications for speciation in
cichlid ﬁshes. Evolution 1987, 41:1357-1369.
13. Bisazza A, Dadda M, Facchin L, Vigo F: Artiﬁcial selection on laterality in the
teleost ﬁsh Girardinus falcatus. Behav Brain Res 2007, 178:29-38.

doi:10.1186/jbiol218
Cite this article as: Palmer AR: Scale-eating cichlids: from hand(ed) to
mouth. Journal of Biology 2010, 9:11.

