Feijó Journal of Biology 2010, 9:18
http://jbiol.com/content/9/3/18

MINIREVIEW

The mathematics of sexual attraction
José A Feijó*
See research article: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/32

Abstract
Pollen tubes follow attractants secreted by the ovules.
In a recent paper in BMC Plant Biology, Stewman and
colleagues have quantified the parameters of this
attraction and used them to calibrate a mathematical
model that reproduces the process and enables
predictions on the nature of the female attractant and
the mechanisms of the male response.
Darwin referred to the rapid success of flowering plants
in evolution as an ‘abominable mystery’. A great deal of
this success relies on the peculiar ways of sexual
reproduction that they have evolved. The facts that
delight us and spark our curiosity about the sexual
behavior of animals, in fact the essence of many novels –
attraction, deception, chemistry, male competition,
female selection, abortion, death and sacrifice – take
place just below our noses every time we appreciate the
fine scent of a flower.
The lovers, usually invisible to the eye, are the male and
female gametophytes, the pollen grain and the embryo
sac; the plot occurs inside the female reproductive
organs, collectively known as the pistil (Figure 1). The
final act involves the irresistible attraction to the ovule
through specific molecules, leading inevitably to the
altruistic self-sacrifice of the pollen tube cell, which
explodes to deliver the sperm cells to the embryo sac.
Ever since Linnaeus, the process has intrigued
biologists, and although the fundamental basis of the
interactions were understood in the 19th century by
researchers such as Robert Brown, Giovanni Battista
Amici, Darwin and Sergei Nawaschin [1], the molecular
nature of this fatal attraction is only now beginning to be
understood [2]. Mathematics is now being used to
*Correspondence: jfeijo@fc.ul.pt
Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, P-2780-156 Oeiras, Portugal and Universidade
de Lisboa, Faculdade de Ciências, Depto. Biologia Vegetal, Campo Grande C2,
P-1749-016 Lisboa, Portugal
© 2010 BioMed Central Ltd

© 2010 BioMed Central Ltd

investigate the problem for the first time, in a groundbreaking article recently published in BMC Plant Biology
[3]. In this study, Stewman and colleagues use a semi-vivo
system to better quantify the nature and range of the
ovule’s attractants. More importantly, they applied a
stochastic mathematical model of whole-cell motility to
pollen tube growth. This sort of model has previously
been used with success to describe chemotaxis in various
eukaryotic cells, such as leukocytes and Listeria. When
calibrated with the new experimental data, the model
enabled predictions to be made about the size and
physical features of the attractant. The results suggest
that the growth features observed greatly enhance the
attraction efficiency of the ovules.

The complex anatomy of a fatal attraction
Most of the beauty that flowers may have for us through
their combinations of colors, shapes and scents have,
from a developmental point of view, only one purpose:
attracting insects and other animals through deception to
perform pollination. Reproduction occurs when a pollen
grain lands on the receptive surface of pistil, the stigma
(Figure 1), whether it arrives there through a
sophisticated relationship between insects and orchids or
through the mere dispersion of grass pollen by the wind.
There, the word ‘chemistry’ has a literal meaning as well
as a metaphorical one, because the bonding between the
specialized outer layers of the cell walls of the pollen and
the outer stigma cells has been calculated to be stronger
than the strongest industrial superglue [1]. Many
receptors and ligands come into place to assure proper
recognition, and if the match is compatible, the stigma
cells nurture the highly dehydrated pollen grains by
providing them with water and nutrients, allowing
germination. The pollen tube then grows out of the
pollen grain in an extreme example of polarized, apical
cell growth that results from an unusual set of cell
features [4]. The pollen tube is one of the fastest growing
cells in nature, and encodes a very specialized
transcriptome for cell signaling and communication,
which makes them efficient stimulus-perception
machines [1]. But how and why these cell-cell interactions
take place and navigate the pollen tube so precisely to

Feijó Journal of Biology 2010, 9:18
http://jbiol.com/content/9/3/18

Page 2 of 5

Hydration
Activation

Germination

cer; rtg

tip1; seth1 and seth2

Style penetration
Adhesion
Invasive pollen tube growth
ttd34; ttd42; mad; pgp; anx1
and anx2

Stigma
Pollen
Style

Transmitting tissue
Pollen tube

Ovary

Pollen tube orientation
Ovule
Embryo sac

pop2; maa

Ovule penetration
and fertilization
RLK feronia/sirene; aca9; hap2/gcs1;
amc; lre; myb98

Figure 1. The anatomy of sexual reproduction in Arabidopsis. A pistil is shown, with pollen at various stages of pollination. In a typical
compatible pollination, pollen adheres to and germinates on the stigma, producing a pollen tube. The tube grows through the female tissues
toward the ovary, where it needs to adjust its growth trajectory to find an ovule and then turn again to enter the micropyle and penetrate the
embryo sac. White boxes indicate the main organs that take part in these interactions; blue boxes indicate the main processes (from adhesion at
top left to fertilization at the bottom); red text indicates representative Arabidopsis mutants that affect these processes in any way; red arrows show
the main cell-cell interaction between the male gametophyte (pollen grain and tube) and the different female organs and gametophyte (embryo
sac). In Arabidopsis the whole process, from pollen adhesion to fertilization, takes about 4 to 8 hours.

target the ovule’s entrance – the micropyle – are still
matters of debate.
These events all take place deep inside the pistil tissues,
and it has only recently been possible to image them
directly by means of two-photon microscopy [5]. In the
decades since the pioneering work of Rosen,
Mascarenhas and others, evidence has accumulated that
a combination of chemotropic molecules is probably
needed for some of the steps. However, for most of the
path (from adhesion to entry into the ovary; Figure 1),
the anatomical arrangement of the tissues seems to be
sufficient to mechanically provide a limited freedom for
tube growth. The physical and chemical features of the
tissues that make direct contact with pollen tubes (lipids,
water, glycosylated proteins, and so on) provide the rest
of the signals [1,6]. With the advent of genetics, a number

of screens in Arabidopsis isolated mutations for most
steps of this so-called progamic phase of reproduction (a
representative list of mutants for each step is shown in
red in Figure 1). Some of these mutants have provided
evidence for long-range targeting, with signaling
occurring over perhaps as far as 500 µm. The list of genes
involved is likely to get significantly larger as new
screening methods reveal dozens of male- and femalespecific mutations, especially in Arabidopsis [7], but so
far none has brought us close to the specific chemotaxis
molecule(s).

Of gradients and explosive discharges
Curiously enough, answers to the question of the
chemotaxis molecule’s identity came from classical
experimental embryology. For a long time, various teams

Feijó Journal of Biology 2010, 9:18
http://jbiol.com/content/9/3/18

have been developing partially artificial fertilization
schemes, for either fundamental or applied reasons [6].
In most of these schemes, pollen is allowed to germinate
in the stigma, but the style is excised and the pollen tubes
are allowed to grow out of the style into an artificial
medium. This semi-vivo method has more recently been
combined with isolated ovules to test the hypothesis of
whether the system is sufficient to provide attraction to
the pollen tube; this would validate the existence of
gradients of attractants secreted from the ovules. Such a
system was first shown to work in the succulent plant
Gasteria [8] and more recently in the model species
Arabidopsis [9], the lily Lilium [10] and maize [11]. But
none of these has been as powerful and informative as
the system developed by Higashiyama and colleagues
using the wishbone flower, Torenia fournieri [6]. Starting
from the anatomical observation that in this species the
female gametophyte – the embryo sac – is naked and
exposed without any surrounding tissue, these authors
[6] developed a series of experiments that showed for the
first time the explosive discharge of the pollen tube inside
the ovule and identified the synergid cells (Figure 2) as
the source of the diffusing attractant signal [6]. In a tourde-force of proteomics, the same authors recently
isolated the first proteins to be shown to be specifically
involved in the attractant signal: small, defensin-like,
Figure 2. Ovule attraction and the chemotaxis of pollen tube
growth. (a) Pollen tube guidance precedes double fertilization
in flowering plants. A pollen tube carrying two sperm cells leaves
the placenta to grow along the funiculus (the foot of the ovule)
into the micropyle (the entrance of the ovule) following gradients
generated by the maternal tissues of the ovule and by the female
gametophyte. An embryo sac contains the egg apparatus (egg
cell and two synergid cells), the central cell with two polar nuclei,
and three antipodal cells. It is usually surrounded by a supportive
tissue – the nucellus – and two layers of protective tissue – the inner
and outer integuments. In Torenia the nucellus is disintegrated,
generating a naked egg apparatus at the micropylar region. Adapted
from [11]. (b,c) Semi-vivo growth system in Arabidopsis. Pollen is
germinated in the stigma, but the style is cut (top in (b)) and cocultivated with dissected ovules (bottom in (b)). When coming out
of the style, pollen tubes grow in the surface of a semi-solid agar
medium, and eventually target the micropyles of the ovules (c). If
penetration is achieved, the contents of the tubes are discharged
inside one synergid; if the system is carried out with pollen tubes
(arrows in (c)) labeled with green fluorescent protein, the moment
of fertilization is visible by fluorescence (arrowheads in (c)), and
ovules can be scored in terms of successful attraction. The scale bars
represent 100 mm. Adapted from [9]. (d) Depiction of the angles
used in the analysis of pollen tube turning made by Stewman et al.
[3]. These angles indicate how much the pollen tube would have to
turn to take the most direct path toward the micropyle (qmp), and
describe the new direction chosen by the pollen tube in response
to the gradient (qtip). These quantitative data were then gathered for
various incubation periods to deduce the nature and effect of the
gradient produced by the diffusion of an attractant from the ovule’s
micropyle.

Page 3 of 5

(a)

Outer
integument

Chemotaxis

Inner
Egg cell
integument
Micropyle
Sperm
cell

Synergid

Antipodal
cells
Central cell

Nucellus
Vegetative
nucleus
Pollen
tube

Funiculus

Placenta

(b)

Cut pistil

(c)

(d)

θ tip

θ mp

Micropyle

Ovule
Tip location
at a timepoint

Feijó Journal of Biology 2010, 9:18
http://jbiol.com/content/9/3/18

cysteine-rich peptides called LUREs [12]. A model of
pollen tube attraction by diffusion of molecules from the
micropyle now seems to be well established (Figure 2a). If
comparisons can be drawn from the animal field [11],
many more classes of proteins are expected to be
described, as the proteomics effort is only just starting
and many screening efforts are getting under way [7].

Attraction through gradients: where there is
a ligand there must be a receptor
The development of a suitable semi-vivo system of
fertilization for Arabidopsis (Figure 2b,c) has not only
enabled the use of genetics, it has also been used to
investigate the physical nature of the diffusing molecule
in Arabidopsis, as it has in Torenia [8]. Stewman et al. [3]
have now carefully analyzed the growth curvature angles
of Torenia pollen tubes (Figure 2d) in various experi­
mental conditions, namely with different incubation
times of the ovules (presumably corresponding to
different levels of a standing gradient), and could thus
determine important quantitative parameters of the
attraction process. First, they found that the gradient
action could extend a distance of 100 to 150 mm [3], a
distance significantly longer than had been previously
thought [6,9] or than had been experimentally tested
with artificial gradients of isolated molecules [2,12]. This
distance estimate probably means that various types of
molecules with different ranges and actions come
together to produce the biological reaction. There is no
doubt that species specificity must be assigned by geneencoded proteins, and that the isolated LUREs and the
Zea mays egg apparatus 1 protein (ZmEA1) both produce
positive tropic effects. However, the evidence seems to
implicate many other non-specific, small, diffusible
chemicals, such as ions or even the signaling gas nitric
oxide (NO) [10]. In fact, the involvement of NO is not a
surprise, because various behaviors shown by pollen
tubes when NO concentration is disturbed seem to
indicate a slowing down of growth of the pollen tube as it
approaches the diffusion source; these effects fit with
those found in the model of Stewman and colleagues [3].
The apparent simplicity of pollen tube growth is leading
to various approaches to mathematical modeling of its
main features. Pollen tubes have been successfully
described through mechanical or geometrical approaches
[13]. Looking from a different angle, the prominence of
the signaling systems of pollen tube growth was recently
modeled by assuming that soluble N-ethylmaleimide
sensitive factor attachment protein receptors (SNAREs)
and small signaling GTPases are the main effectors of
growth [14].
Stewman et al. [3] took a step further and focused on
the formal properties of the system as shown from the
kinetic parameters precisely derived from the semi-vivo

Page 4 of 5

system. The problem of gradient sensing is not trivial,
and the authors [3] followed the strategy of building on
stochastic whole-cell motility models, which basically
assume that pollen tubes can sense a difference in the
fraction of the receptors bound to an attractant and
change their growth depending on this fraction. One
prediction of the model was that a slower growth rate
inside a standing gradient of attractant (which is assumed
to exist from the isotropic diffusion of the attractant from
the ovule) would greatly enhance the ability of pollen
tubes to successfully target ovules, a prediction that they
could statistically validate with their experiments [3].
Furthermore, the model describes the observed patterns
of random and directed growth observed during growth
of pollen tubes in vitro.
Although the assumption of a purely formal
mathematical description of any biological phenomenon
may lead to purely phenomenological descriptions of
limited experimental value, the complexity of the system
and the number of different cellular components that
seem to be fundamental for growth [4] make these
approaches highly informative, or even fundamental, to
understanding the mechanistic basis of the macroscopic
response of the system. For example, this model [3] may
help us to understand how pollen tubes couple external
guidance cues with intracellular ion gradients or other
known cell steering mechanisms. In addition, the model
assumes that there are at least two patches of receptors,
which are separated in the pollen tube. Although this
assumption says nothing about what the receptors are, it
does suggest that a minimal model of a sensor with a
strict apical point location would not work; instead, it
favors a membrane or cytosolic spatially segregate or a
receptor that stretches across (at least) the diameter of
the tube. The model also assumes that the change in
concentration across the tip of the tube is much less than
the average concentration at the tip. Despite being
affected by the limitation of the two-dimensional
modeling performed [3], this is a strong quantitative
prediction that can be validated when searching for novel
molecules that might fit the profile. And how does
slowing down of the tubes take place near the micropyle?
NO, for example, is known for slowing down growth
rates [10], and the formulation of the model does, in fact,
allow for multi-factorial interactions affecting the growth
process. Importantly, this mathematical formulation may
allow discrimination of different effects during
experimental procedures based both on the deviation of
the growth angle and/or the relationship of the growth
rate to successful targeting.
As with many other mathematical approaches to
complex biological behavior, this new model from
Stewman et al. [3] raises more questions than answers.
But the fact that new approaches are contributing to a

Feijó Journal of Biology 2010, 9:18
http://jbiol.com/content/9/3/18

Page 5 of 5

precise experimental description of the system [2,11,12]
may make mathematical modeling an important tool for
testing and selecting candidate molecules that may fit the
in vivo biological profile of the final step of plant sexual
attraction.

7.	

Acknowledgements
I thank Leonor Boavida for drawing and compiling Figure 1. Financial support
for my laboratory is provided by FCT grants PTDC/BIA-BCM/108044/2008 and
PTDC/QUI/64339/06.

9.	

8.	

10.	
11.	

Published: 29 March 2010
References
1.	 Boavida, L, Becker, JD, Vieira, AM, Feijó, JA: Gametophyte interaction and
sexual reproduction: how plants make a zygote. Int J Dev Biol 2005,
49:615-632
2.	 Dresselhaus T, Márton ML: Micropylar pollen tube guidance and burst:
adapted from defense mechanisms? Curr Opin Plant Biol 2009, 12:773-780.
3.	 Stewman SF, Jones-Rhoades M, Bhimalapuram P, Tchernookov M, Preuss D,
Dinner AR: Mechanistic insights from a quantitative analysis of pollen tube
guidance. BMC Plant Biol 2010, 10:32.
4.	 Michard E, Alves RF, Feijó JA: The role of ion fluxes in polarized cell growth:
the pollen tube as an experimental paradigm. Int J Dev Biol 2009, 53:
1609-1622
5.	 Cheung AY, Boavida LC, Aggarwal M, Wu HM, Feijó JA: The pollen tube
journey in the pistil. Imaging the in vivo process by two-photon
microscopy. J Exp Bot, in press.
6.	 Higashiyama T, Hamamura Y: Gametophytic pollen tube guidance. Sex Plant
Reprod 2008, 21:17-26.

12.	

13.	
14.	

Boavida LC, Shuai B, Yu HJ, Pagnussat GC, Sundaresan V, McCormick S:
A collection of Ds insertional mutants associated with defects in male
gametophyte development and function in Arabidopsis thaliana. Genetics
2009, 181:1369-1385.
Willemse MTM, Plyushch TA, Reinders MC: In vitro micropylar penetration of
the pollen tube in the ovule of Gasteria verrucosa. Plant Science 1995, 108:
201-208.
Palanivelu R, Preuss D: Distinct short-range ovule signals attract or repel
Arabidopsis thaliana pollen tubes in vitro. BMC Plant Biol 2006, 6:7.
Prado, AM, Colaço, R, Moreno, N, Silva, AM, Feijó JA: Targeting to ovules is
dependent on nitric oxide signalling. Mol Plant 2008, 1:703-714.
Márton M, Dresselhaus T: A comparison of early molecular fertilization
mechanisms in animals and flowering plants. Sex Plant Reprod 2008,
21:37-52.
Okuda S, Tsutsui H, Shiina K, Sprunck S, Takeuchi H, Yui R, Kasahara RD,
Hamamura Y, Mizukami A, Susaki D, Kawano N, Sakakibara T, Namiki S, Itoh K,
Otsuka K, Matsuzaki M, Nozaki H, Kuroiwa T, Nakano A, Kanaoka MM,
Dresselhaus T, Sasaki N, Higashiyama T: Defensin-like polypeptide LUREs are
pollen tube attractants secreted from synergid cells. Nature 2009,
458:357-361.
Geitmann A: How to shape a cylinder: pollen tube as a model system for
the generation of complex cellular geometry. Sex Plant Reprod 2010,
23:63-71.
Kato N, He H, Steger AP: A systems model of vesicle trafficking in
Arabidopsis pollen tubes. Plant Physiol 2010, 152:590-601.

doi:10.1186/jbiol233
Cite this article as: Feijó JA: The mathematics of sexual attraction. Journal of
Biology 2010, 9:18.

