Kundu and Slack Journal of Biology 2010, 9:20
http://jbiol.com/content/9/3/20

MINIREVIEW

Robust and specific inhibition of microRNAs in
Caenorhabditis elegans
Samrat T Kundu and Frank J Slack*
See research article http://www.silencejournal.com/content/1/1/9

Abstract
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that
regulate the expression of numerous target genes.
Yet, while hundreds of miRNAs have been identified,
little is known about their functions. In a recent
report published in Silence, Zheng and colleagues
demonstrate a technique for robust and specific
knockdown of miRNA expression in Caenorhabditis
elegans using modified antisense oligonucleotides,
which could be utilized as a powerful tool for the study
of regulation and function of miRNAs in vivo.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are approximately 22-nucleotidelong non-coding RNA molecules that were first
discovered in Caenorhabditis elegans but are now known
to be expressed in all metazoans. miRNA genes are
present singly or in clusters, often with their individual
promoters and regulatory elements, while some miRNA
genes are also present within the introns of other protein
coding genes. miRNAs are transcribed as long primary
transcripts and are processed first in the nucleus by the
microprocessor DRSH-1/DROSHA and then in the
cytoplasm by the DCR-1/DICER complex to generate the
active 21 to 23-nucleotide RNA molecules. These are
recruited by the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC)
and guided to the 3’ untranslated regions of target
messenger RNAs (mRNAs) with complete or incomplete
sequence complementarity, resulting in either
degradation of the target mRNA or inhibition of its
translation. A single miRNA can target multiple mRNAs
and this ability to control the expression of numerous
genes makes miRNAs pivotal in regulating various life

*Correspondence: frank.slack@yale.edu
Department of Molecular, Cellular and Development Biology, Yale University,
New Haven, CT 06520, USA
© 2010 BioMed Central Ltd

© 2010 BioMed Central Ltd

processes, from development through metabolism to
senescence, aging and death (reviewed in [1]).
While animals like C. elegans contain hundreds of
miRNAs, little is known about their functions. Moreover,
with the advent of deep sequencing technology, novel
miRNAs are being discovered in different model
organisms, requiring faster and more convenient
methodologies to study their functional importance
through inhibiting their activity in vivo. A recent report
by Zheng and colleagues [2] now demonstrates the
efficient and specific inhibition of miRNAs in C. elegans by
dextran-conjugated modified antisense oligonucleotides.
miRNAs were first identified in C. elegans in 1993 [3]
and since then this elegant model system has been
extensively utilized for functional analysis of miRNAs. C.
elegans is so useful for these analyses because of its easy
genetics, completely sequenced genome and simple
anatomy. To study the role of individual miRNAs in
different cellular pathways, forward genetics approaches
have yielded many ‘loss of function’ (lf ) mutant strains
for various miRNAs [4,5]. Although such mutant strains
have been extensively used for functional studies of the
target miRNAs, their generation is both time consuming
and labor intensive. Further, it is tedious to generate
knockout alleles for miRNAs that are essential for
survival and development, and in cases where the
miRNAs are located in the intronic sequences of protein
coding genes, it is possible that their knockout will
perturb expression of the protein coding gene. It is also
difficult to specifically knock out a single miRNA from a
miRNA gene cluster without affecting the expression of
the remaining miRNAs in the cluster.
Many groups have tried using reverse genetics
approaches to inhibit specific miRNA function
transiently in different model systems. The most popular
tool of choice is differently modified antisense
oligonucleotides, which are easy to synthesize and
deliver. Several research groups have demonstrated
inhibition of miRNA function with limited success using
antisense oligonucleotides such as locked nucleic acids
(modified RNA nucleotides) [6] or morpholinos (nucleic

Kundu and Slack Journal of Biology 2010, 9:20
http://jbiol.com/content/9/3/20

acid analogs) [7] in Drosophila, zebrafish, and mice
[8-10].
C. elegans has been widely used as the model system to
study the biological role of small non-coding RNAs and
yet, to date, no standard techniques or protocols are
available to effectively and conveniently knockdown
miRNA function transiently. To inhibit miRNA
expression in C. elegans, Zamore’s group injected 2’-oxymethyl oligonucleotides into developing embryos [11].
Their embryo injection technique is technically difficult
and, therefore, has not been used extensively.
Furthermore, the primary drawback of using these
modified oligonucleotides is the incumbent toxicity
caused by poor solubility and inadequate cytoplasmic
retention and tissue distribution.
To address these issues, Zheng and colleagues [2]
conjugated 2’-oxy-methyl antisense oligonucleotides
complementary to the target miRNAs with the
polysaccharide dextran, which has high solubility in
water and shows increased cellular uptake and
availability. The authors also modified these
oligonucleotides by conjugating one to three molecules
of rhodamine per molecule of dextran. These modified
antisense oligonucleotides were injected into the
syncytial gonads of adult worms and embryos were
selected based on the presence of rhodamine (Figure 1).

Injected into the
syncytial gonads

Pharynx

Gut

Gonad Eggs

Rhodamine
Antisense oligonucleotides
Dextran

Vulva

Progeny

Pharynx

Gut
Gonad

Inhibit microRNA
function in the body

Eggs

Vulva

Target microRNA bound to
antisense oligonucleotides

Figure 1. Schematic representation of the technique elaborated
in the study by Zheng and colleagues. In this technique, a
dextran-conjugated rhodamine-labeled antisense oligonucleotide
complementary to the target microRNA is injected into the syncytial
gonads of C. elegans. The transformed progeny are selected
by the presence of rhodamine. In these progeny the antisense
oligonucleotides bind to and deplete the available pool of target
miRNA, thus inhibiting miRNA function in the animal.

Page 2 of 3

Zheng
and
colleagues
[2]
used
antisense
oligonucleotides complementary to lin-4 and let-7 and
comprehensively demonstrated robust knockout
phenotypes similar to those seen in the respective loss of
function mutant strains of lin-4 and let-7. For example,
progeny of animals injected with antisense
oligonucleotides against lin-4 show delayed exit in
differentiation of seam cells and lack of vulva formation,
known phenotypes for lin-4(lf ) [3]. The progeny of
worms injected with antisense oligonucleotides
complementary to let-7 demonstrated a bursting vulva
phenotype with lack of alae (longitudinal ridge)
formation in 100% of animals, consistent with the
phenotype shown by let-7 knockout mutant animals [5].
By contrast, progeny of animals treated with antisense
oligonucleotides complementary to miR-84, a let-7 family
member, exhibited no visible phenotype, consistent with
the known phenotype of mir-84(lf ) mutants. miR-84 has
a sequence that is highly homologous to let-7 sequence,
yet the phenotype observed in the miR-84 knockdown
animals was completely unlike the let-7 knockdown
phenotype therefore confirming the specificity of
inhibition. Using a similar strategy, the authors could
demonstrate specific inhibition of lys-6 miRNA in the
ASEL neurons, where it functions to maintain left-right
symmetry. This technique also successfully demonstrated
the inhibition in activity of miR-42, which is active only
during embryonic development. In addition, the authors
demonstrate that this new class of antisense
oligonucleotides could be utilized for specific and
simultaneous inhibition of two miRNAs, in this case lin-4
and lys-6.
As with all antisense techniques, the dextranconjugated antisense 2’-oxy-methyl oligonucleotides
have a limitation, in this case with respect to the period
of efficacy of inhibition against target miRNAs in the
animal. The inhibition was robust until 15-20 hours after
the L4 molt with higher doses of injection, after which
the effect diminished, most probably due to the dilution
of the antisense oligonucleotides inside the animal. For
this reason this method of miRNA inhibition might not
be the most effective for long-term functional assays,
such as aging assays, where the miRNA in question needs
to be inhibited throughout the life span of the animal.
Overall, the data presented in the report by Zheng and
colleagues [2] convincingly suggest that this new class of
antisense oligonucleotides could prove to be a very
powerful and effective tool for the robust and specific
inhibition of miRNA function in vivo. This technique
would be very useful for studying the different biological
functions of essential and novel miRNAs in C. elegans.
While it remains to be tested, this technology does not
appear to be limited to just C. elegans, and could be
applicable in other organisms as well.

Kundu and Slack Journal of Biology 2010, 9:20
http://jbiol.com/content/9/3/20

Published: 1 April 2010
References
1.	 Esquela-Kerscher A, Slack FJ: Oncomirs – microRNAs with a role in cancer.
Nat Rev Cancer 2006, 6:259-269.
2.	 Zheng G, Ambros V, Li W: g miRNA in Caenorhabditis elegans using a potent
and selective antisense reagent. Silence 2010, 1:9
3.	 Lee RC, Feinbaum RL, Ambros V: The C. elegans heterochronic gene lin-4
encodes small RNAs with antisense complementarity to lin-14. Cell 1993,
75:843-854.
4.	 Miska EA, Alvarez-Saavedra E, Abbott AL, Lau NC, Hellman AB, McGonagle
SM, Bartel DP, Ambros VR, Horvitz HR: Most Caenorhabditis elegans
microRNAs are individually not essential for development or viability. PLoS
Genet 2007, 3:e215.
5.	 Reinhart BJ, Slack FJ, Basson M, Pasquinelli AE, Bettinger JC, Rougvie AE,
Horvitz HR, Ruvkun G: The 21-nucleotide let-7 RNA regulates
developmental timing in Caenorhabditis elegans. Nature 2000, 403:901-906.
6.	 Orom UA, Kauppinen S, Lund AH: LNA-modified oligonucleotides mediate
specific inhibition of microRNA function. Gene 2006, 372:137-141.

Page 3 of 3

7.	

Flynt AS, Li N, Thatcher EJ, Solnica-Krezel L, Patton JG: Zebrafish miR-214
modulates Hedgehog signaling to specify muscle cell fate. Nat Genet 2007,
39:259-263.
8.	 Boutla A, Delidakis C, Tabler M: Developmental defects by antisensemediated inactivation of micro-RNAs 2 and 13 in Drosophila and the
identification of putative target genes. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:4973-4980.
9.	 Krützfeldt J, Rajewsky N, Braich R, Rajeev KG, Tuschl T, Manoharan M, Stoffel M:
Silencing of microRNAs in vivo with ‘antagomirs’. Nature 2005, 438:685-689.
10.	 Esau C, Kang X, Peralta E, Hanson E, Marcusson EG, Ravichandran LV, Sun Y,
Koo S, Perera RJ, Jain R, Dean NM, Freier SM, Bennett CF, Lollo B, Griffey R:
MicroRNA-143 regulates adipocyte differentiation. J Biol Chem 2004,
279:52361-52365.
11.	 Hutvágner G, Simard MJ, Mello CC, Zamore PD: Sequence-specific inhibition
of small RNA function. PLoS Biol 2004, 2:e98.
doi:10.1186/jbiol230
Cite this article as: Kundu ST and Slack FJ: Robust and specific inhibition of
microRNAs in Caenorhabditis elegans. Journal of Biology 2010, 9:20.

