Gardner et al. Journal of Biology 2010, 9:4
http://jbiol.com/content/9/1/4

MINIREVIEW

SnoPatrol: how many snoRNA genes are there?
Paul P Gardner*1, Alex Bateman1 and Anthony M Poole2,3
See research articles http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/10/515 and http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/61

Abstract
Small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs) are among the most
evolutionarily ancient classes of small RNA. Two
experimental screens published in BMC Genomics
expand the eukaryotic snoRNA catalog, but many more
snoRNAs remain to be found.

What are snoRNAs?
The biosynthesis of eukaryote ribosomes is complex,
involving numerous processing events to generate mature
ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) and the subsequent assembly
of processed rRNAs with dozens of ribosomal proteins.
Small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs) are central to ribosome
maturation, being required in key cleavage steps to
generate individual rRNAs, and in their capacity as guides
for site-speciﬁc modiﬁcation of rRNA. In the rRNA of
the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, on the order
of 100 snoRNA-guided modiﬁcations are made during
the biosynthesis of a single ribosome; this number is
approximately double in humans. Around half of these
modifications are methylations of the 2’ position on
ribose, and are carried out by C/D-box small nucleolar
ribo­nucleoproteins (snoRNPs), which consist of a guide
snoRNA acting in concert with several proteins, includ­
ing Nop1p, the RNA methylase component of the
snoRNP. The remaining modiﬁcations produce pseudo­
uridine, an isomer of uridine, and are guided by H/ACAbox snoRNPs, with the Cbf5p subunit performing the
pseudouridylation reaction [1]. Figure  1 illustrates the
inter­action between the two types of snoRNA and their
respective RNA targets.
Over the past decade, the snoRNA universe has
expanded rapidly. H/ACA- and C/D-family RNAs have
been discovered in Archaea (where they are dubbed
sRNAs, as Archaea lack nucleoli), and likewise modify
*Correspondence: pg5@sanger.ac.uk
1
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton,
CB10 1SA, UK
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2010 BioMed Central Ltd

© 2010 BioMed Central Ltd

rRNA, and in the Cajal body of the eukaryote cell (small
Cajal body scaRNPs), where they modify small nuclear
RNAs (snRNAs), the RNA constituents of the spliceo­
some [2]. Recently, HBII-52, a human C/D snoRNA, has
been shown to regulate splicing of serotonin receptor 2C
mRNA, indicating a wider role in gene regulation [3], and
another C/D snoRNA has been shown to be expressed
from the Epstein-Barr virus genome [4]. As our know­
ledge of snoRNAs expands beyond RNA modiﬁcation
and hints at wider regulatory roles, there is a need to
identify the full repertoire of snoRNAs in a genome and
establish when and on what RNAs they act. Against this
backdrop, experimental screens that trawl organism-byorganism for snoRNAs are vital, as bioinformatic screens
have so far failed to provide a robust computational
alternative to labour-intensive experimental methods of
RNA identiﬁcation. Two recent papers in BMC Genomics
by Zhang et al. [5] and Liu et al. [6] report the identi­ﬁc­
ation of novel snoRNAs from the rhesus monkey Macaca
mulatta and the ﬁlamentous fungus Neurospora crassa,
respectively. Both sets of authors experimentally investi­
gated snoRNA pools by sequencing cDNAs derived from
RNA extracted from their species of interest. Subsequent
bioinformatics analysis was used by each group to classify
sequences as either of the two snoRNA classes or other­
wise. These approaches netted 48 H/ACA and 32 C/D
box snoRNAs in the monkey and 20 H/ACA and 45 C/D
box snoRNAs in the fungus. Studies like these are vital to
the extension of our knowledge of how complements of
snoRNAs vary through evolution. Given the intense
effort required for such analyses, it is worth taking stock
and asking, where are the current gaps in our knowledge
of snoRNAs?

The taxonomic distribution of known snoRNAs
To investigate the taxonomic distribution of the known
snoRNAs and highlight where potential new discoveries
can be made, we have gathered data from the Pfam
(protein families), Rfam (RNA families), Genomes Online
(GOLD) and EMBL databases (Figure  2). The Rfam
database uses experimentally validated ncRNA sequences
that have been deposited in EMBL to search for
homologous sequences across all nucleotide sequences
(see the red and pink bars in Figure 2). The results show

Gardner et al. Journal of Biology 2010, 9:4
http://jbiol.com/content/9/1/4

Page 2 of 4

D’

NΨ

NΨ

3’

ox
C’ b

bo
x

5’

Me

5’
H box

ACA

Eukaryotes:

Archaea:

Cbf5
Gar1
Nop10
Nhp2

Cbf5
Gar1
Nop10
L7Ae

3’

3’

bo
x

5’

D

3’

ox
Cb

Me

5’

5’

3’

Eukaryotes:

Archaea:

Fibrillarin (Nop1)
Nop56
Nop58
15.5kDa/Snu13

Fibrillarin
Nop5
L7Ae

Figure 1. snoRNA structure. The structure of a H/ACA snoRNA (left) and a C/D box snoRNA (right). The targets for RNA modiﬁcation are shown in
blue. The most important snoRNA-associated proteins are listed below.

that for many major taxonomic clades there are few or no
known snoRNAs annotated.
In the Archaea, annotated snoRNAs are notably absent
from the taxon Halobacterium, for which a genome
sequence has been available for nearly 10 years and which
has been proposed to contain snoRNAs on the basis of
the presence of the snoRNP-associated proteins ﬁbril­
larin and Nop56/58 [7]. In fact, only 33% of the crenar­
chaeal and 60% of the euryarchaeal groups carry known
or predicted snoRNAs, and numbers of snoRNAs are
very low in the Euryarchaeota. Still within the Archaea,
snoRNAs have been annotated in some methanococcal
genomes, predicted on the basis of homology to experi­
mentally validated snoRNAs from members of the
Thermoprotei [8].
Some eukaryotic taxa fare little better. For example, in
the unicellular diplomonads (Diplomonadida; Figure 2),
such as Giardia lamblia, there are no snoRNA families
listed in Rfam, although putative snoRNA-like RNAs
have been reported from G. lamblia [9,10]. Databases
such as Rfam inevitably lag behind the current literature;
we expect that these missing snoRNAs will be included
in future releases.
The case of the microsporidia (unicellular organisms
allied to the fungi) is interesting in that one genome

sequence was published nearly a decade ago and eight
further projects are in progress, yet despite this apparent
wealth of information no snoRNAs have been identified.
But like diplomonads, micro­sporidia clearly have
components of the snoRNA machinery and almost
certainly utilize snoRNAs. The absence, therefore, is due
to the fact that snoRNAs have not been experimentally
determined, and current bioinformatics methods are not
sensitive enough to reliably identify snoRNAs in these
taxa from sequence analyses alone, so none have been
inferred by homology.
As expected, the Metazoa are comparatively well
studied; there is a host of supporting experimental and
bioinformatics evidence for snoRNAs across the meta­
zoa, with the exception of the Cnidaria and the Platy­
helminthes, which currently only have bioinfor­matically
predicted snoRNAs based upon sequence similarity to
other metazoan snoRNAs.
The genome sequence for the parasitic protozoan
Trichomonas vaginalis (a parabasalid; Figure 2) bears one
lonely C/D-box snoRNA annotation for a homolog of the
fungal snoRNA snR52/Z13. Furthermore, this is a rather
low-scoring hit (26.12 bits, E-value = 1.04e+02) to an
otherwise exclusively fungal family and the Trichomonas
sequence has some differences from the canonical C- and

Gardner et al. Journal of Biology 2010, 9:4
http://jbiol.com/content/9/1/4

Crenarchaeota

Page 3 of 4

Thermoprotei
Halobacteria

Archaea

Methanobacteria
Euryarchaeota

Methanococci
Methanomicrobia
Thermococci
Thermoplasmata

Alveolata

Apicomplexa

Amoebozoa

Archamoebae

Diplomonadida

Hexamitidae

Euglenozoa

Kinetoplastida

Fungi

Dikarya
Microsporidia
Arthropoda

Eukaryota

Chordata
Metazoa

Cnidaria
Nematoda
Platyhelminthes

Parabasalidea

Viridiplantae

Trichomonada
Chlorophyta
Streptophyta

Stramenopiles

Bacillariophyta
Oomycetes

Color
snoRNP protein domains from Pfam
SSU rRNA regions from Rfam
GOLD genome projects
All snoRNA regions from Rfam
All published snoRNA sequences in Rfam

Length
<10
<100
<1000
<10,000
<100,000

Figure 2. The taxonomic distribution of existing snoRNA
annotations. The ﬁgure displays a tree derived from the top three
levels of the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI)
taxonomy. Mapped onto this are counts of: (1) the snoRNP-associated
Pfam 24.0 domains Nop, Nop10p, Gar1, SHQ1, fibrillarin and TruB_N
(blue); (2) the small subunit (SSU) rRNA regions annotated by Rfam
10.0 (green); (3) genome projects registered as completed, draft or
in progress from the GOLD database (version 3.0, October 22, 2009)
(gold); (4) all snoRNA regions annotated by Rfam 10.0 (red); (5) EMBL
sequences annotated as snoRNAs that are also annotated by Rfam
10.0 (pink). We only show here the lineages where a signiﬁcant
amount of sequencing effort has been directed (see Supplementary
Table 1 in Additional data file 1 for the full results). Lengths of the bars
correspond to counts in each taxa for each category. The shortest bar
length corresponds to counts between 1 and 10 (exclusive), the next
shortest is between 10 and 100 (exclusive), and so on.

D-box motifs, suggesting that the prediction may be
spurious (Additional file 1). In contrast, the two main
groups of green plants (Viridiplantae), the Strepto­phyta
(multicellular green plants and some green algae) and

Chlorophyta (green algae) (Figure 2), both have good
snoRNA coverage, which is based on both bioinformatics
and intensive experimental study of green plant
snoRNAs.
Finally, the Stramenopiles (Figure 2) have five
completed and one draft genome project according to the
GOLD database. Both the two main lineages of
stramenopiles, Bacillariophyta and Oomycetes, have
reasonable numbers of predicted snoRNAs based on
homology to other lineages (9 and 75, respectively),
though none has been experimentally validated. Whereas
counts of Pfam domains and rRNAs indicate that the
snoRNP machinery is present in all known taxa of
Archaea and Eukaryota, surprisingly it seems to be
absent from Oomycetes. However, this lack is likely to be
due to the protein sequences not yet being included in
the public sequence databases rather than bona ﬁde loss
of the snoRNP machinery.

Future directions for snoRNA research
Up to now, bioinformatics approaches for de novo predic­
tion of snoRNAs have not been a great success. As shown
by Figure 2, a homology search using experimentally
veriﬁed snoRNAs, as performed by the Rfam database,
has some success in identifying snoRNAs in taxonomic
lineages where no experiments have yet been performed.
But many of these predictions need further validation
before they can be entirely trusted. Using additional
information such as genomic context and target infor­ma­
tion could prove quite useful in this regard [11,12]. The
growing host of orphan snoRNAs - that is, snoRNAs
lacking a target-modiﬁcation site - are especially interest­
ing in that several lines of evidence hint at a possible
regulatory role, as with human HBII-52 [3]. The snoRNA
universe is thus likely to expand in function, phylogenetic
diversity, and through the discovery of new snoRNAs.
Fortunately, discovery has never been easier, thanks to
the growing power of new sequencing technologies.
Additional ﬁle 1: Supplementary methods and results. It contains
details of how the data for Figure 2 were collected, the full dataset
summarized in Figure 2 in a tabular format, and an alignment of a
T. vaginalis candidate snoRNA and the fungal homologs.

Acknowledgements
PPG and AGB are supported by the Wellcome Trust (grant number WT077044/
Z/05/Z). AMP is a Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences Research Fellow
supported by a grant from the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation.
Author details
1
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton,
CB10 1SA, UK.
2
Department of Molecular Biology and Functional Genomics, Stockholm
University, SE-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden.
3
School of Biological Sciences, University of Canterbury, Christchurch 8140,
New Zealand.

Gardner et al. Journal of Biology 2010, 9:4
http://jbiol.com/content/9/1/4

Published: 25 January 2010
References
1.	 Reichow SL, Hamma T, Ferré-D’Amaré AR, Varani G: The structure and
function of small nucleolar ribonucleoproteins. Nucleic Acids Res 2007,
35:1452-1464.
2.	 Darzacq X, Jády BE, Verheggen C, Kiss AM, Bertrand E, Kiss T: Cajal bodyspeciﬁc small nuclear RNAs: a novel class of 2’-O-methylation and
pseudouridylation guide RNAs. EMBO J 2002, 21:2746-2756.
3.	 Kishore S, Stamm S: The snoRNA HBII-52 regulates alternative splicing of
the serotonin receptor 2C. Science 2006, 311:230-232.
4.	 Hutzinger R, Feederle R, Mrazek J, Schiefermeier N, Balwierz PJ, Zavolan M,
Polacek N, Delecluse HJ, Huttenhofer A: Expression and processing of a
small nucleolar RNA from the Epstein-Barr virus genome. PLoS Pathog
2009, 5:e1000547.
5.	 Zhang Y, Liu J, Jia C, Li T, Wu R, Wang J, Chen Y, Zou X, Chen R, Wang X, Zhu D:
Systematic identiﬁcation and evolutionary features of rhesus monkey
snoRNAs. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:61
6.	 Liu N, Xiao ZD, Yu CH, Shao P, Liang YT, Guan DG, Yang JH, Chen CL, Qu LH,
Zhou H: SnoRNAs from the ﬁlamentous fungus Neurospora crassa:
structural, functional and evolutionary insights. BMC Genomics 2009,
10:515.
7.	 Ng WV, Kennedy SP, Mahairas GG, Berquist B, Pan M, Shukla HD, Lasky SR,
Baliga NS, Thorsson V, Sbrogna J, Swartzell S, Weir D, Hall J, Dahl TA, Welti R,
Goo YA, Leithauser B, Keller K, Cruz R, Danson MJ, Hough DW, Maddocks DG,

Page 4 of 4

Jablonski PE, Krebs MP, Angevine CM, Dale H, Isenbarger TA, Peck RF,
Pohlschroder M, Spudich JL, et al.: Genome sequence of Halobacterium
species NRC-1. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000, 97:12176-12181.
8.	 Omer AD, Lowe TM, Russell AG, Ebhardt H, Eddy SR, Dennis PP: Homologs of
small nucleolar RNAs in Archaea. Science 2000, 288:517-522.
9.	 Yang CY, Zhou H, Luo J, Qu LH: Identiﬁcation of 20 snoRNA-like RNAs from
the primitive eukaryote, Giardia lamblia. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
2005, 328:1224-1231.
10.	 Chen XS, Rozhdestvensky TS, Collins LJ, Schmitz J, Penny D: Combined
experimental and computational approach to identify non-proteincoding RNAs in the deep-branching eukaryote Giardia intestinalis. Nucleic
Acids Res 2007, 35:4619-4628.
11.	 Hoeppner MP, White S, Jeffares DC, Poole AM: Evolutionarily stable
association of intronic snoRNAs and microRNAs with their host genes.
Genome Biol Evol 2009, 1:420-428.
12.	 Bazeley PS, Shepelev V, Talebizadeh Z, Butler MG, Fedorova L, Filatov V,
Fedorov A: snoTARGET shows that human orphan snoRNA targets locate
close to alternative splice junctions. Gene 2008, 408:172-179.

doi:10.1186/jbiol211
Cite this article as: Gardner PP, et al.: SnoPatrol: how many snoRNA genes are
there? Journal of Biology 2010, 9:4.

