Hayward et al. Journal of Biology 2010, 9:12
http://jbiol.com/content/9/2/12

MINIREVIEW

No better time to FRET: shedding light on host
pathogen interactions
Richard D Hayward*1, Jon D Goguen2 and John M Leong2
See research article http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/7/81

Abstract
Understanding the spatio-temporal subversion of
host cell signaling by bacterial virulence factors is
key to combating infectious diseases. Following a
recent study by Buntru and co-workers published in
BMC Biology, we review how fluorescence (Forster)
resonance energy transfer (FRET) has been applied to
studying host-pathogen interactions and consider the
prospects for its future application.
Pathogen-induced signaling in mammalian cells
The incidence of diseases caused by pathogenic bacteria
is once again increasing with the resurgence of
tuberculosis, the rise of nosocomial infections, and
escalating resistance to antibiotics. Over the last two
decades it has become increasingly apparent that many
bacterial pathogens of substantial medical relevance
engage in complex cross-talk with cells of their
mammalian hosts. It is thus critical to decipher the
molecular mechanisms of the underlying bacterial
virulence weaponry, which includes not only the secreted
exotoxins, like those that cause anthrax and cholera, but
also the multiple ‘effectors’ injected directly into
eukaryotic target cells via specialized nanomachines by
pathogens like Escherichia coli O157:H7 and Yersinia.
Such studies have already yielded new insights into the
molecular basis of microbial pathogenesis, suggesting
new avenues for the development of novel diagnostics,
therapeutics and vaccines. These toxins and effectors can
also be exploited as reagents to probe the pathways
controlling key cellular processes such as signal
*Correspondence: richard.hayward@ucl.ac.uk
1
Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology, University College London and
Birkbeck, University of London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK
2
Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, UMass Medical School,
55 Lake Ave North, Worcester, MA 01655, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2010 BioMed Central Ltd

© 2010 BioMed Central Ltd

transduction, cytoskeletal dynamics, intracellular
trafficking and cytokinesis. An exciting new epoch of
molecular, cellular and structural microbiology has
therefore dawned.
In recent years, substantial research efforts have
focused on the actions of such bacterial virulence
proteins and the identity of their host targets, clearly an
essential initial step. However, an appreciation of the
spatio-temporal dynamics underlying the intricate
molecular cross-talk that triggers complex events such as
bacterial internalization into host cells remains a distant
goal. Most biochemical and genetic approaches entail
cell  disruption or artificial protein localization and
expression, and observations arise from population
rather than single cell analyses. In addition, many
signaling interactions are transient or of low-affinity and
thus difficult to detect.

Fluorescence (Forster) resonance energy transfer
(FRET) to detect direct interactions between
labeled molecules
One powerful approach is fluorescence (Forster)
resonance energy transfer (FRET) [1]. FRET utilizes two
fluorophores, a donor and an acceptor, of which the
donor emission spectrum overlaps with the acceptor
absorption spectrum. If the two fluorophores are spatially
segregated, excitation of the donor results in donor
emission with high efficiency. In contrast, when in close
proximity (usually 1-10 nm), excitation of the donor
results in acceptor emission due to the overlap in spectra
that allows resonance energy transfer between the donor
and the acceptor probes (Figure 1). A modification of
FRET termed acceptor photobleaching FRET involves
selective photochemical destruction of the acceptor
fluorophore, which, if the two fluorophores had
previously been physically close enough for FRET, results
in a release from donor quenching and an increase in
donor emission. Technically, this is particularly
advantageous as it reduces the requirements for
compensation and calibration associated with standard
FRET.

Hayward et al. Journal of Biology 2010, 9:12
http://jbiol.com/content/9/2/12

Page 2 of 4

L

L

a
YFP
436nm

CFP

CFP

480nm

FRET

535nm

480nm

a YFP
Figure 1. Schematic representation of a hypothetical FRET
experiment. In the resting state (left), a transmembrane receptor is
fused to cyan fluorescent protein (CFP, donor). Adaptor protein (a) is
fused to yellow fluorescent protein (YFP, acceptor). a-YFP is distal
from receptor-CFP, so upon excitation at 436 nm, donor fluorescence
at 480 nm is recorded. Upon binding to a ligand (L, right), a-YFP binds
to receptor-CFP and the reduction in distance enables FRET. Upon
equivalent excitation at 436 nm, donor fluorescence (480 nm) is
reduced, but acceptor fluorescence at 535 nm is now recorded due
to FRET. FRET can similarly be performed with two transmembrane or
two soluble factors.

FRET is now widely applied in the context of cellular
signaling to detect interactions such as the formation of
protein complexes, and to detail molecular dynamics
such as changes in protein conformation. When
combined with fluorescence microscopy, it can
simultaneously provide information about the location
within a single cell in which an interaction is occurring in
two and three dimensions. Given the power of this
technique, its use in understanding host-pathogen
interplay has, to date, been surprisingly limited. Here we
review the principal studies that have utilized FRET to
understand signaling events, in each case initiated at the
plasma membrane by a bacterium, and we consider the
prospects for future applications.

Probing the intermolecular interactions of
bacterial exotoxins
Some pathogenic bacteria release exotoxins that poison
mammalian target cells directly by disrupting their
membrane integrity or indirectly using associated
enzymatic activities that override cellular pathways.
These virulence factors alone are often sufficient to cause
disease, and their activities normally require toxin
oligomerization and interaction with host targets.
Bastiaens and colleagues investigated one example of
this [2]. Cholera toxin (CTX) has an oligomeric AB5
structure, comprising one enzymatically active CTX-A

subunit embedded within an isopentamer of CTX-B
moieties. The secreted holotoxin binds to the host cell
surface via interactions between CTX-B and plasma
membrane GM1 ganglioside. After internalization and
processing, CTX-B and CTX-A dissociate, whereupon a
liberated sub-fragment of CTX-A irreversibly ADPribosylates the α-subunits of heterotrimeric Gs proteins,
leading to aberrant persistent activation of host adenylate
cyclase. Compartmentalization and separation of the
holotoxin were evaluated by measuring acceptor
photobleaching FRET between CTX-B labeled with the
sulfoindocyanine dye Cy3 and an antibody against
CTX-A labeled with Cy5 in single cells, exploiting
confocal laser scanning microscopy. The data illuminated
that after holotoxin internalization, CTX-A is trafficked
back towards the plasma membrane by retrograde
transport, whereas the CTX-B multimer persists with the
Golgi apparatus. This study was one of the first to apply
FRET to a pathogen system and contributed to
understanding the unexpected complexities of
intracellular CTX transport.
A related study of Helicobacter pylori vacuolating
cytotoxin (VacA), which binds and enters mammalian
cells to induce cellular vacuolation, also addressed toxin
multimerization. In this case FRET was monitored within
cells co-expressing VacA and derivative proteins fused to
cyan or yellow fluorescent protein, where association
induces energy transfer between the VacA-CFP donor
and VacA-YFP acceptor pairs [3]. These FRET data
suggested that intermolecular interactions between
discrete monomers are critical for intracellular activity of
the toxin.

Probing pathogen-host cell interplay that triggers
or prevents bacterial uptake
These early FRET-based studies of bacterial exotoxins
focused on understanding the intermolecular inter­
actions between toxin subunits rather than between
toxins and their host targets. Another timely and
ambitious application of FRET has been to examine the
cellular signaling pathways underpinning the interaction
of bacterial pathogens with both phagocytic and nonphagocytic host cells.
The Yersinia outer membrane protein invasin acts as a
high affinity ligand for cellular β1-family integrins,
transmembrane receptors involved in the formation of
multi-protein structures termed focal adhesions that link
the extracellular matrix to the intracellular cytoskeleton.
Invasin-mediated clustering of integrins triggers host
signaling on the cytoplasmic face of the plasma
membrane. This requires the activation of the small
GTPase Rac1, which subsequently binds downstream
adaptors that promote cytoskeletal rearrangements and
bacterial internalization. Ralph Isberg’s laboratory

Hayward et al. Journal of Biology 2010, 9:12
http://jbiol.com/content/9/2/12

demonstrated that Rac1 was activated at the site of
internalization by normally non-phagocytic cells
(Figure 2), detecting the presence of activated CFP-Rac1
by its ability to bind to a YFP-labeled domain of its
downstream adaptor PAK1 [4]. Although Yersinia is
capable of entry into non-phagocytic cells, the bacterium
paradoxically also utilizes a specialized (type III)
secretion system to translocate effector proteins that
prevent its uptake by phagocytic immune cells. Isberg
and co-workers used FRET to show that the concerted
action of two effectors, YopE, which suppresses Rac1
activation, and YopT, which alters Rac1 membrane
localization, generated two spatially distinct Rac1
populations, an active pool in the nucleus and an inactive
pool in the cytoplasm, leading to cellular paralysis. Thus,
FRET, being uniquely suited to investigating the location
and activation state of host molecules, was integral to
uncovering this multifaceted manipulation of GTPasedependent signaling [5].
FRET can be combined with live cell imaging to reveal
not only detailed interactions critical to manipulation of
host cells by bacteria, as described above, but also the
kinetics of those interactions, thereby establishing a
specific sequence of events. Such a study resulted from a
collaboration between the laboratories of Pascale Cossart
and Joel Swanson, who combined FRET with live cell
imaging to document the kinetics of signaling during
Listeria cell entry [6]. Listeria monocytogenes employs
outer membrane proteins termed internalins to hijack
Rac1-dependent
receptor-mediated
endocytosis.
Internalin B (InlB) binds the hepatocyte growth factor
receptor (HGFR/c-Met) to stimulate actin reorganization.

PBD-mYFP

mCFP-Rac1

Page 3 of 4

They used FRET to investigate the activation of two host
factors critical for the entry process, Rac1 and
phosphoinositide (PI)-3-kinase, which generates the
bioactive signaling lipids phosphatidylinositol-3,4bisphosphate [PI(3,4)P2] and phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5triphosphate [PI(3,4,5)P3]. Rac1 activation was
monitored similarly to that described above. To monitor
activation of PI-3-kinase, the investigators co-expressed
YFP and CFP derivatives of the pleckstrin-homology
(PH) domain of the serine/threonine kinase Akt, which
specifically interacts with these phosphoinositides.
Bacterial attachment resulted in a localized FRET signal, as
PI(3,4)P2 and PI(3,4,5)P3 were sufficiently concentrated
at the plasma membrane to permit a FRET signal
between the bound Akt PH domains. Their kinetic analy­
sis of living cells showed that activation of PI3-kinase and
concomitant generation of 3’-phosphoinositides at
bacterial entry sites occurs upstream of Rac1 activation,
which in turn is critical for F-actin assembly. Thus, FRET
enabled both the spatial and temporal mapping of lipidand protein-based signaling at the plasma membrane.
Most recently, in their study in BMC Biology [7], Hauck
and co-workers combined live fluorescence microscopy
and FRET techniques to study events triggered by the
association of Neisseria gonorrhoeae surface (Opa)
proteins with the mammalian transmembrane receptor
CEACAM3. Uptake of CEACAM3-bound bacteria
depends on an immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activa­
tion motif (ITAM)-like sequence within the cytoplasmic
domain of the receptor, which is rapidly phosphorylated
upon ligand binding. This is engaged by multiple host
signaling proteins that contain a Src-homology 2 (SH2)

phase

FRET

Figure 2. Yersinia pseudotuberculosis binding to host cells leads to local activation of Rac1 GTPase. COS1 cells, expressing mCFP-Rac1 and
mYFP fused to the p21 binding domain of Pak1 (PBD) were incubated with an effector-deficient Y. pseudotuberculosis for 20 minutes, then fixed.
GTP-loaded Rac1 interaction with the mYFP-PBD brings fused mCFP and mYFP into close proximity, allowing energy transfer. This energy transfer
is recorded microscopically as a corrected FRET image. CFP, YFP, and FRET images were captured using appropriate filter cube sets and the FRET
image was corrected for bleed-through and cross-excitation. Scale bar (applicable to all images except insets) = 10 μm. Activation of Rac1 in
response to bacterial binding is depicted here. Images courtesy of Sima Mohammadi and Ralph Isberg.

Hayward et al. Journal of Biology 2010, 9:12
http://jbiol.com/content/9/2/12

domain, including the Src-family kinase (SFK) Hck.
Using acceptor photobleaching FRET, as well as other
approaches, Hauck and colleagues demonstrated that
Hck and CEACAM3 transiently but directly interact
specifically at sites of bacterial attachment [7]. Although
the interaction of these two mammalian signaling
proteins was predicted from earlier biochemical studies,
this investigation confirmed the prediction and also
revealed the dynamic nature of the association in living
cells.

FLIM-FRET: it’s easy to FRET
Measuring FRET can be simplified considerably by
determining the fluorescence lifetime rather than
fluorescence intensities. Energy transfer from the donor
to the acceptor accelerates the decay of donor
fluorescence, allowing energy transfer efficiency to be
determined directly from measurements of fluorescence
lifetime. Only a single measurement is required and,
because many sources of artifact and noise that modulate
fluorescence intensity such as sample absorption and
variation in laser intensity have no effect on fluorescence
lifetime, the requirements for calibration are minimal.
For these reasons, fluorescence lifetime imaging (FLIM)
is rapidly becoming the preferred method for making
FRET measurements. This technique has been utilized to
investigate plant cell invasion by the ascomycete powdery
mildew fungus [8], but has yet to be applied to any
human pathogen.
In addition, FLIM-FRET facilitates the use of FRET as a
‘spectroscopic ruler’ to measure the physical distance
between donor and acceptor fluorophores, a technique
utilized by Latz and colleagues [9] to decipher signaling
associated with immune recognition of CpG DNA, a
pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP), by the
Toll-like receptor TLR9. To determine how engagement
of the ectodomain of TLR9 might transmit an
intracellular signal, they expressed both CFP-TLR9 and
YFP-TLR9 in cultured cells and measured the distance
between adjacent TLR9 cytoplasmic domains using
FLIM-FRET. They calculated that receptor engagement
resulted in a decrease in the intermolecular distance
from 7.0 nm to less than 5.4 nm, a change apparently
sufficient to trigger immune signaling by recruiting the
downstream adaptor molecule MyD88.
Future perspectives
The investigation of pathogen-induced signal transduc­
tion in mammalian cells is a rich vein to tap for
understanding not only the pathogenesis of infectious

Page 4 of 4

agents, but also fundamental features of mammalian cell
signaling. As illustrated here, FRET-based techniques
that enable the description of the activation state of key
signaling molecules, their cellular location, proximity to
each other, and the timing of their interactions, have
already proved to be powerful tools to decipher the
spatiotemporal features of critical signaling events. Given
the fundamental importance of microbial-host cell
communication and the growing capacity for its
application, FRET should be more widely employed by
investigators of infectious agents. Making FLIM-capable
instruments more widely available and accessible for use
with samples containing live infectious agents will be
needed to realize this welcome development.
Acknowledgements
We thank Ralph Isberg for helpful discussion and Sima Mohammadi for Figure
2. This was supported by NIH R01 AI46454 to JML. RDH is a Royal Society
University Research Fellow.
Author details
1
Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology, University College London and
Birkbeck, University of London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK
2
Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, UMass Medical School,
55 Lake Ave North, Worcester, MA 01655, USA
Published: 18 February 2010
References
1. 	 Förster T: Intermolecular energy migration and fluorescence. Ann Phys
1948, 2:55-75.
2. 	 Bastiaens PHI, Majoul IV, Verveer PJ, Söling H-D, Jovin TM: Imaging the
intracellular trafficking and state of the toxin AB5 quaternary structure of
cholera toxin. EMBO J 1996, 15:4246-4253.
3. 	 Willhite DC, Ye D, Blanke SR: Fluorescence resonance energy transfer
microscopy of the Helicobacter pylori vacuolating cytotoxin within
mammalian cells. Infect Immun 2002, 70:3824-3832.
4. 	 Wong KW, Isberg RR: Yersinia pseudotuberculosis spatially controls
activation and misregulation of host cell Rac1. PLoS Pathog 2005, 1:e16.
5. 	 Wong KW, Mohammadi S, Isberg RR: The polybasic region of Rac1
modulates bacterial uptake independently of self-association and
membrane targeting. J Biol Chem 2008, 283:35954-35965.
6. 	 Seveau S, Tham TN, Payrastre B, Hoppe AD, Swanson JA, Cossart P: A FRET
analysis to unravel the role of cholesterol in Rac1 and PI 3-kinase
activation in the InlB/Met signalling pathway. Cell Microbiol 2007,
9:790-803.
7. 	 Buntru A, Zimmermann T, Hauck CR: Fluorescence resonance energy
transfer (FRET) based subcellular visualization of pathogen-induced host
receptor signalling. BMC Biol 2009, 7:81.
8. 	 Bhat RA, Miklis M, Schmelzer E, Schulze-Lefert P, Panstruga R: Recruitment
and interaction dynamics of plant penetration resistance components in a
plasma membrane microdomain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005,
102:3135-3140.
9. 	 Latz E, Verma A, Visintin A, Gong M, Sirois CM, Klein DC, Monks BG, McKnight
CJ, Lamphier MS, Duprex WP, Espevik T, Golenbock DT: Ligand-induced
conformational changes allosterically activate Toll-like receptor 9. Nat
Immunol 2007, 8:772-779.
doi:10.1186/jbiol225
Cite this article as: Hayward RD et al. No better time to FRET: shedding light
on host pathogen interactions. Journal of Biology 2010, 9:12.

