Valadkhan and Nilsen Journal of Biology 2010, 9:5
http://jbiol.com/content/9/1/5

MINIREVIEW

Reprogramming of the non-coding transcriptome
during brain development
Saba Valadkhan* and Timothy W Nilsen*
See research article http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/11/14

Abstract
A recent global analysis of gene expression during
the differen­tiation of neuronal stem cells to neurons
and oligodendrocytes indicates a complex pattern
of changes in the expression of both protein-coding
transcripts and long non-protein-coding RNAs.
A fascinating and unexpected outcome of the recent
analyses of higher eukaryotic genomes has been the
demon­stration of pervasive transcription from nonprotein-coding genomic sequences. Indeed, the prelimi­
nary results of the human ENCODE project indicate that
whereas protein-coding sequences occupy less than 2% of
the human genome, close to 93% of the genome is
transcribed into RNA [1]. Although intronic sequences
occupy a significant percentage of the non-protein-coding
sequences in the genome, the majority of the independent
non-protein-coding transcripts belong to the group of
long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) - RNAs that are more
than 200 nucleotides in length and do not appear to have
any protein-coding potential [2-4]. A few members of
this mysterious and highly understudied group of RNAs
have been known for a long time, for example the Xist
and Air RNAs; however, the majority of these transcripts
have been only recently discovered in high-throughput
transcriptome analyses. Furthermore, most of them are
expressed at low levels and many do not show a high level
of sequence conservation. Thus, the functional signifi­
cance of this class of RNAs as a whole is still very poorly
understood and subject to debate and speculation.

Large non-coding RNAs: a novel class of regulators
or transcriptional noise?
Although our understanding of the biological role of this
class of RNAs is rudimentary, there are several studies
*Correspondence: saba.valadkhan@case.edu; twn@case.edu
Center for RNA Molecular Biology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland,
OH 44106, USA
© 2010 BioMed Central Ltd

© 2010 BioMed Central Ltd

that suggest that lncRNAs are much more than mere
‘trans­crip­tional noise’, or random output of background
trans­cription, in higher eukaryotes. An interesting clue to
the impor­tance of this class of transcripts as a whole
comes from the comparison of the percentage of the
genome dedicated to non-coding sequences in organisms
of differing complexity: as complexity increases so does
the extent of non-protein-coding genomic sequences [5].
As the rather minor interspecies differences in the pro­
teome cannot fully account for the dramatic increase in
the level of complexity seen in higher eukaryotes, it is
plausible that the non-coding transcriptome with its
rapid rate of evolution may play a part in this process.
Interestingly, bioinformatic analyses of the genomic
regions that have evolved most rapidly between human
and other primates point to several non-coding sequen­
ces, one of which is trans­cribed into a brain-specific long
non-coding RNA that is expressed during the
development of the human cortex [6]. Other studies have
also indicated that a large fraction of the lncRNAs are
expressed in brain, further supporting the tantalizing
possibility that they might be involved in the develop­ment
of the daunting complexity of the human brain [2-4].
Perhaps the most convincing evidence for a functional
role for lncRNAs comes from studies that indicate that
rather than resulting from background transcription, the
expres­sion of the non-coding transcripts is both tempor­
ally and spatially regulated. Several high-throughput
analyses have shown tissue-specific expression of
lncRNAs in stem cells, neuronal tissues and lymphocytes,
among other tissues [7-10]. It has also been shown that
stimulation of cultured macrophages with immunogenic
stimuli results in the induction of the expression of a
specific group of lncRNAs [7], proving that the expres­
sion of at least some of the lncRNAs is regulated.
Interestingly, in many cases the tissue-specific lncRNA
genes seem to be positioned in proximity to proteincoding genes with a known functional role in that tissue,
suggesting the possibility of regulation in cis by these
RNAs [2-4,7]. The above studies provide evidence for a
functional role for at least a fraction of lncRNAs, but in
order to determine the extent to which lncRNAs participate

Valadkhan and Nilsen Journal of Biology 2010, 9:5
http://jbiol.com/content/9/1/5

Converging

Diverging

{
{

Sense

Sense
Antisense

Antisense
Sense
Antisense

Intergenic
sense/antisense

Chromatin
structure
modification

{

Partially

Antisense

Transcriptional
interference

Neighboring
but nonoverlapping

{

{
{

Sense

Double-stranded
RNA formation

Overlapping

Fully

Page 2 of 3

+
+
-

++
++
++
++
++
+
-

+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+

?

?

?

Figure 1. Genomic position of lncRNAs may offer clues to their function. The positional relationship of the lncRNAs (thin arrows) compared to
the transcript they regulate (thick arrow) is shown. Serrated lines indicate the long distance between the intergenic lncRNAs and the nearest known
transcript, which they may or may not regulate. The three major functional mechanisms employed by currently characterized lncRNAs are listed to
the right, and the likelihood that each strategy is used is shown by: - (unlikely to be used), + (likely to be used) or ++ (very likely to be used) signs.

in cellular processes, more extensive and in-depth studies of
the expression pattern of this group of transcripts and
follow-up functional analyses are required.
In a recent in-depth global analysis of lncRNA
expression, published in BMC Neuroscience, Mercer et al.
[11] custom designed microarrays to analyze the changes
in the expression pattern of both protein-coding trans­
cripts and long non-coding RNAs in forebrain-derived
mouse neural stem cells as they differentiate to GABAergic
neurons and oligodendrocytes. Initial analysis of their
results indicated that in parallel with up- and down­
regulation of mRNA expression, the expression of a signifi­
cant number of lncRNAs was also altered during neuronal
and oligo­dendro­cytic differ­entiation events. The expres­
sion of 16% of the approxi­mately 14,800 interrogated
protein-coding transcripts and 5% of the approximately
3,600 analyzed lncRNAs was significantly changed at one
or more differen­tiation steps in these studies, with the
altered expression of several members of both groups
exclusively occurring during a single differentiation step. A
number of previously characterized neuronally expressed
lncRNAs were among those with altered expression, results
that support the validity of the analyses.

Positional clues to the function of lncRNAs
While the above data suggest that the expression pattern
of lncRNAs is at least as complex as that of mRNAs, a
crucial question is the functional significance of the
observed changes in lncRNA expression. To date, the
molecular mechanism of function of the majority of
lncRNAs remains unknown. However, the most
informative clues to their possible mode of function
come from their genomic position in relation to other
transcripts. In many of the studied examples, lncRNAs
have been found within trans­criptionally complex loci
where their expression, directly or indirectly, influences
their neighboring genes [2-4]. An lncRNA may partially
or completely overlap another gene in the sense or
antisense direction, or it can be located in the close
vicinity of another gene in the converging or diverging
sense or antisense orientation without over­lapping it
(Figure 1). Depending on the exact position, the lncRNA
transcript may affect the neighboring gene through
formation of double-stranded RNA, or cause trans­
criptional interference or alter the local chromatin
structure merely by being transcribed. There are also
several known examples of intergenic lncRNAs, transcripts

Valadkhan and Nilsen Journal of Biology 2010, 9:5
http://jbiol.com/content/9/1/5

that are located far away from other known transcripts
and that are likely to exert their cellular function, if any,
in trans, through mechanisms yet to be elucidated.
As a first step toward understanding the functional
signifi­cance of the observed gene expression patterns,
Mercer et al. [11] analyzed the genomic loci of the
lncRNAs that showed significant changes in expression
in their analysis. Interestingly, several of these lncRNAs,
which included a number of novel transcripts, were part
of transcribed loci that contained protein-coding genes
with a known function in neural development. In many
cases, the position of the lncRNA-mRNA pair was
conserved between mouse and human, and expression
analyses indicated coordinated expres­sion, suggesting a
functional interaction. A number of other lncRNAs were
associated with highly conserved enhancer elements that
regulate the development of forebrain, and yet another
group overlapped brain-specific microRNAs (miRNAs),
suggesting functional roles in the development of the
nervous system for at least a subgroup of the lncRNAs
studied. For example, a novel mRNA-like lncRNA that is
both spliced and polyadenylated - AK044422 - overlaps a
highly conserved and abundant brain-specific miRNA,
miR-124a, and furthermore shows a comple­mentary
expression pattern with ptbp1 (encoding polypyrimidine
tract binding protein 1), a target of miR‑124a. Analysis of
the secondary structure of the lncRNA suggests that it
might host several miRNAs, in addition to miR-124a, but
whether it has a functional role beyond hosting miR-124a
remains to be determined.
The intriguing associations observed by Mercer et al.
[11] underscore several unanswered questions in the
lncRNA field and at the same time provide a firm
foundation for future in-depth studies aimed at addressing
these questions. To what extent does the observed up- or
downregulation of the analyzed lncRNAs affect lineage
specification and differentiation of the neuronal stem
cells? Do lncRNAs have master regulatory functions in
the development of the central nervous system or indeed,
in all developmental pathways, or are they confined to
minor, fine-tuning regulatory roles? If so, what are the
main strategies used by lncRNAs and can we predict
their molecular mechanism of function by analysis of
their sequence and genomic position? Further studies of
mecha­nism and the dissection of the function of the
lncRNAs will be partially guided by analysis of lncRNA
secondary structure, as done in the present study. This
indicated the presence of several conserved secondary
structure elements that may correspond to hitherto
unknown RNA functional domains.

Page 3 of 3

Taken together, studies so far have provided us with a
first glimpse of the intricate and complex web of
interactions between lncRNAs and protein-coding RNAs
and herald the emergence of a new paradigm for the
developmental and differentiation processes of higher
eukaryotes. While it is tempting to speculate that many
existing gaps in our know­ledge of cellular development
and function may reflect a lack of knowledge of lncRNA
functions, defining the extent to which this class of RNAs
affects the development and function of higher eukaryotic
species awaits detailed biochemical, molecular and cell
biological analyses.
Published: 5 February 2010
Reference
1.	 ENCODE Project Consortium, Birney E, Stamatoyannopoulos JA, Dutta A,
Guigó R, Gingeras TR, Margulies EH, Weng Z, Snyder M, Dermitzakis ET,
Thurman RE, Kuehn MS, Taylor CM, Neph S, Koch CM, Asthana S, Malhotra A,
Adzhubei I, Greenbaum JA, Andrews RM, Flicek P, Boyle PJ, Cao H, Carter NP,
Clelland GK, Davis S, Day N, Dhami P, Dillon SC, Dorschner MO, Fiegler H, et al.:
Identification and analysis of functional elements in 1% of the human
genome by the ENCODE pilot project. Nature 2007, 447:799-816.
2.	 Mercer TR, Dinger ME, Mattick JS: Long non-coding RNAs: insights into
functions. Nat Rev Genet 2009, 10:155-159.
3.	 Ponting CP, Oliver PL, Reik W: Evolution and functions of long noncoding
RNAs. Cell 2009, 136:629-641.
4.	 Wilusz JE, Sunwoo H, Spector DL: Long noncoding RNAs: functional
surprises from the RNA world. Genes Dev 2009, 23:​1494-1504.
5.	 Taft RJ, Pheasant M, Mattick JS: The relationship between non-proteincoding DNA and eukaryotic complexity. BioEssays 2007, 29:288-299.
6.	 Pollard KS, Salama SR, Lambert N, Lambot MA, Coppens S, Pedersen JS,
Katzman S, King B, Onodera C, Siepel A, Kern AD, Dehay C, Igel H, Ares M Jr,
Vanderhaeghen P, Haussler D: An RNA gene expressed during cortical
development evolved rapidly in humans. Nature 2006, 443:167-172.
7.	 Ravasi T, Suzuki H, Pang KC, Katayama S, Furuno M, Okunishi R, Fukuda S, Ru K,
Frith MC, Gongora MM, Grimmond SM, Hume DA, Hayashizaki Y, Mattick JS:
Experimental validation of the regulated expression of large numbers of
non-coding RNAs from the mouse genome. Genome Res 2006, 16:​11-19.
8.	 Pang KC, Dinger ME, Mercer TR, Malquori L, Grimmond SM, Chen W, Mattick
JS: Genome-wide identification of long noncoding RNAs in CD8+ T cells.
J Immunol 2009, 182:7738-7748.
9.	 Dinger ME, Amaral PP, Mercer TR, Pang KC, Bruce SJ, Gardiner BB, AskarianAmiri ME, Ru K, Soldà G, Simons C, Sunkin SM, Crowe ML, Grimmond SM,
Perkins AC, Mattick JS: Long noncoding RNAs in mouse embryonic stem
cell pluripotency and differentiation. Genome Res 2008, 18:​1433-1445.
10.	 Mercer TR, Dinger ME, Sunkin SM, Mehler MF, Mattick JS: Specific expression
of long noncoding RNAs in the mouse brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008,
105:716-721.
11.	 Mercer TR, Qureshi IA, Gokhan S, Dinger ME, Li G, Mattick JS, Mehler MF: Long
noncoding RNAs in neuronal-glial fate specification and oligodendrocyte
lineage maturation. BMC Neuroscience 2010, 11:14.

doi:10.1186/jbiol197
Cite this article as: Valadkhan and Nilsen. Reprogramming of the non-coding
transcriptome during brain development. Journal of Biology 2010, 9:5.

