Pinaud Journal of Biology 2010, 9:19
http://jbiol.com/content/9/3/19

MINIREVIEW

Genome of a songbird unveiled
Raphael Pinaud*
See research articles http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/9/131, http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/220,
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/11/46 and http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/28

Abstract
An international collaborative effort has recently
uncovered the genome of the zebra finch, a songbird
model that has provided unique insights into an array
of biological phenomena.
The study of songbirds has revealed a variety of funda­
mental properties of biological systems. In particular,
neurobiological studies carried out in songbirds have
revealed the presence of newly born neurons in the adult
brain, how steroid hormones affect brain development,
the neural and mechanistic bases of vocalizations, and
how experience modifies neuronal physiology. More
evidently, however, songbirds have been extensively used
as a model for imitative vocal learning, a behavior
thought to be a substrate for speech acquisition in
humans [1,2].
Now an international consortium has unveiled the
genome of the zebra finch (Taeniopygia guttata, Figure
1), along with a multi-layered analysis of its sequence [3].
Sequencing the zebra finch genome was initiated in 2005
under the Large Scale Genome Sequencing Program of
the National Human Genome Research Institute [4],
leveraging prior work in the research community
characterizing the zebra finch brain transcriptome [5-7].
These initiatives, along with new zebra finch genome
sequences, have resulted in the complete genome
sequenced with 17,475 protein-coding genes identified,
as well as regu­latory regions and non-coding RNAs. The
annotation and sequence coverage of the zebra finch
genome will certainly be refined in the years to come, but
the initial endeavor is expected to provide a unique
platform for modern genomics research in this organism.
Further­more, this initial snapshot of the songbird
genome should provide critical insights into fundamental
*Correspondence: pinaud@bcs.rochester.edu
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, 117 Meliora Hall, River Campus,
University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14627, USA
© 2010 BioMed Central Ltd

© 2010 BioMed Central Ltd

scientific ques­tions, including an array of physiological
and evolu­tionary processes. Here, I review some of the
most exciting findings of this pioneering effort.

Development and the brain
The zebra finch genome project [3] has revealed that
nearly 10,000 genes are expressed in the forebrain of
juvenile birds (50 days after hatching; within the critical
period for vocal learning) and adult birds, with an overlap
of approximately 91% across these age groups. These
results indicate that up to 60% of the genes in the genome
are expressed in the brain at any one given time. These
findings also suggest that a significant fraction of proteincoding genes (9%) are developmentally regulated in the
songbird brain, consistent with previous observations
obtained with forward genetic approaches.
Sensory- and motor-regulated transcripts
Auditory experience, a fundamental consequence of
social interactions within and across songbird species,
had been previously shown to strongly affect gene
regulatory events in the auditory forebrain [8]. It was
found [3] that in the auditory forebrain of animals in
silent conditions, approximately 40% of the detected
transcripts are non-coding, indicating that regulatory
microRNAs may have a central role in brain homeostasis.
When birds were stimulated with playbacks of recorded
song, thousands of transcripts were upregulated or
downregulated [9], and analyses of their genomic
sequences revealed that roughly two-thirds of the down­
regulated transcripts were non-coding RNAs. Further­
more, known and novel microRNAs were found to be
expressed in the auditory forebrain, and their binding
sites were detected in the untranslated regions of
regulated genes.
Singing behavior also drives robust gene expression
programs in structures of the song control system, a
specialized brain network required for sensorimotor
integration and vocal output [5,10]. By using a microarray
platform with oligonucleotides generated as part of this
project, the songbird genome consortium [3] was able to
uncover a series of transcriptional regulators whose

Pinaud Journal of Biology 2010, 9:19
http://jbiol.com/content/9/3/19

Figure 1. Zebra finches (Taeniopygia guttata): an adult female
(left) and an adult male (right).

expression was modulated by the act of singing. Changes
in transcription factor expression that occurred early
after singing were strongly correlated with later modifi­
cations in the expression patterns of groups of their
predicted target genes [3]. In fact, many of these targets
have been identified for the first time and will now enable
researchers to develop testable hypotheses about the
gene regulatory interactions that are induced during a
learned behavior.
Overall, these findings [3] highlight the role of micro­
RNAs and non-coding RNAs in the control of gene
expression in the songbird brain, in addition to the active
regulation of transcription factors and their respective
target genes. When comparing hearing-driven transcripts
with genes thought to have been positively selected in
songbirds, a significant over-representation of genes
encoding ion channels was uncovered [3], consistent with
robust and complex expression patterns of ion channelassociated transcripts in stations of the song-control
circuit [11,12].

Genes gained, genes lost
The unveiling of the zebra finch genome also provides
exciting insights into the evolution of avian and mamma­
lian species. As detailed by the consortium authors [3],
the genome lacks genes that encode milk, salivary and
vomeronasal receptor proteins, similarly to what has
been documented for the chicken, a non-vocal-learning
avian species whose genome was uncovered 6 years ago
[13]. Curiously, similarly to chickens, zebra finches lack
the synapsin I gene, which encodes a phosphoprotein
involved in the regulation of neurotransmitter vesicle
availability in pre-synaptic membranes. This finding
suggests that the synaptic transmission machinery differs
between mammalian and avian species, although it is not
clear if such molecular changes translate into functional
modifications at the systems level.

Page 2 of 3

Duplications of a variety of genes relative to chickens
or humans, including growth hormone and caspase-3,
the latter of which is associated with the induction of
apoptosis, and gene family expansions, including of the
PAK3 and PHF7 genes, which are involved in dendritic
plasticity and transcriptional regulation, respectively,
were also found in the zebra finch genome [3].
Interestingly, multiple duplications of the PHF7 gene
seem to have occurred independently in zebra finches
and chickens, suggesting that some aspects of trans­
criptional regulation may have been under evolutionary
pressure in avian species. Whereas these avian lineages
have groups of 17 and 18 PHF7 genes, respectively, the
human genome has been shown to contain only one
PHF7 gene [3].
Finally, the zebra finch genome was found to have a
significant fraction of transcribed mobile elements and a
higher degree of intrachromosomal rearrangement
relative to chicken. An example detailed by the consor­
tium authors [3] refers to genes of the major histo­
compatibility complex, which are scattered across several
chromosomes in the zebra finch genome; in the chicken
and human genomes, such genes have a well established
syntenic organization. Despite these informa­tive speciesspecific differences, the population of coding genes and
the syntenic organization of the zebra finch genome were
found to be highly similar to that of the chicken and, in
many respects, to that of humans.

An exciting future for songbird biological studies
As a result of the pioneering efforts of the consortium
and in addition to the sequencing and annotation of the
genome, an array of publicly available resources and tools
has been developed for songbird studies. These include
normalized and subtracted cDNA libraries and bacterial
artificial chromosome libraries, a largely complete set of
annotated expressed sequence tags, and a microarray
platform [3,6,7,11]. Such tools have enabled multiple
research groups, independently and in collaboration, to
systematically study the functional organization of the
songbird brain and its genomic response to a variety of
conditions, including sensory experience, hormonal
mani­pulations and sensory-motor learning. The out­
comes of this research have been blossoming into
exciting recent advances, including, but not limited to,
insights into the estradiol-synthetic pathway [14], the
repertoire of proteases (the ‘degradome’) [15] and the
collection of neuropeptide prohormones and their
processed peptides (the neuropeptidome) [16]. These
efforts have revealed key information on genes related to
steroid receptors and estrogen biosynthesis [14], insights
into how proteases may shape neuronal func­tional,
immunological and developmental processes [15], as well
as the identity and expression patterns of an array of

Pinaud Journal of Biology 2010, 9:19
http://jbiol.com/content/9/3/19

Page 3 of 3

neuropeptides thought to be involved in the development
and functionality of brain circuits involved in vocal
communication [16].
Over the next few years these efforts will contribute to
an integrative understanding of how the songbird
genomic machinery responds to environmental and
physio­logical challenges and, more broadly, how the
songbird brain is functionally organized. In addition,
active research in these areas is expected to shed light on
basic biological and evolutionary principles in
vertebrates. The importance of a complete understanding
of the songbird transcriptome is highlighted by ongoing,
contiguous research ventures aimed at creating a
songbird gene expression brain atlas. Finally, the study of
songbird biology is reaching an exciting era with the
convergence of the genomic resources detailed above and
the successful development of transgenic zebra finches
using a lentiviral-vector approach [17]. This interface will
provide a unique opportunity for songbird biologists to
test causal relationships between the induction of gene
expression programs, altered cellular physiology and
their behavioral correlates.
Resources for exploring the sequence and annotation
data are available on browser displays at UCSC [18],
Ensembl and the NCBI and at [19].

5.	

Acknowledgements
I thank Erich Jarvis and David Clayton for feedback on this manuscript.
Work in the Pinaud laboratory is supported by NIH/NIDCD and the Schmitt
Foundation.

14.	

6.	

7.	

8.	
9.	

10.	
11.	
12.	
13.	

15.	

Published: 1 April 2010
References
1.	 Doupe AJ, Kuhl PK: Birdsong and human speech: common themes and
mechanisms. Annu Rev Neurosci 1999, 22:567-631.
2.	 Jarvis ED: Learned birdsong and the neurobiology of human language.
Ann N Y Acad Sci 2004, 1016:749-777.
3.	 Warren WC, Clayton DF, Ellegren H, Arnold AP, Hillier LW, Kunstner A, Searle S,
White S, Vilella AJ, Fairley S, Heger A, Kong L, Ponting CP, Jarvis ED, Mello CV,
Minx P, Lovell P, Velho TAF, Ferris M, Balakrishnan CN, Sinha S, Blatti C, London
SE, Li Y, Lin Y-C, George J, Sweedler J, Southey B, Gunaratne P, Watson M, et al.:
The genome of a songbird. Nature 2010,464:757-762.
4.	 Proposal to Sequence the Genome of the Zebra Finch (Taeniopygia
guttata) [http://www.genome.gov/Pages/Research/Sequencing/
SeqProposals/ZebraFinchSeq2.pdf ]

16.	
17.	
18.	
19.	

Wada K, Howard JT, McConnell P, Whitney O, Lints T, Rivas MV, Horita H,
Patterson MA, White SA, Scharff C, Haesler S, Zhao S, Sakaguchi H, Hagiwara
M, Shiraki T, Hirozane-Kishikawa T, Skene P, Hayashizaki Y, Carninci P, Jarvis ED:
A molecular neuroethological approach for identifying and characterizing
a cascade of behaviorally regulated genes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006,
103:15212-15217.
Li X, Wang XJ, Tannenhauser J, Podell S, Mukherjee P, Hertel M, Biane J,
Masuda S, Nottebohm F, Gaasterland T: Genomic resources for songbird
research and their use in characterizing gene expression during brain
development. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 104:6834-6839.
Replogle K, Arnold AP, Ball GF, Band M, Bensch S, Brenowitz EA, Dong S,
Drnevich J, Ferris M, George JM, Gong G, Hasselquist D, Hernandez AG, Kim R,
Lewin HA, Liu L, Lovell PV, Mello CV, Naurin S, Rodriguez-Zas S, Thimmapuram
J, Wade J, Clayton DF: The Songbird Neurogenomics (SoNG) Initiative:
community-based tools and strategies for study of brain gene function
and evolution. BMC Genomics 2008, 9:131.
Mello CV, Velho TA, Pinaud R: Song-induced gene expression: a window on
song auditory processing and perception. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2004,
1016:263-281.
Dong S, Replogle KL, Hasadsri L, Imai BS, Yau PM, Rodriguez-Zas S, Southey
BR, Sweedler JV, Clayton DF: Discrete molecular states in the brain
accompany changing responses to a vocal signal. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2009, 106:11364-11369.
Jarvis ED, Nottebohm F: Motor-driven gene expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 1997, 94:4097-4102.
Wada K, Sakaguchi H, Jarvis ED, Hagiwara M: Differential expression of
glutamate receptors in avian neural pathways for learned vocalization.
J Comp Neurol 2004, 476:44-64.
Lovell PV, Clayton DF, Replogle KL, Mello CV: Birdsong “transcriptomics”:
neurochemical specializations of the oscine song system. PLoS ONE 2008,
3:e3440.
International Chicken Genome Sequencing Consortium: Sequence and
comparative analysis of the chicken genome provide unique perspectives
on vertebrate evolution. Nature 2004, 432:695-716.
London SE, Clayton DF: Genomic and neural analysis of the estradiolsynthetic pathway in the zebra finch. BMC Neurosci 2010, 11:46.
Quesada V, Velasco G, Puente XS, Warren WC, Lopez-Otin C: Comparative
genomic analysis of the zebra finch degradome provides new insights
into evolution of proteases in birds and mammals. BMC Genomics 2010,
11:220.
Xie F, London SE, Southey BR, Annangudi SP, Amare A, Rodriguez-Zas SL,
Clayton DF and Sweedler JV: The zebra finch neuropeptidome: prediction,
detection and expression. BMC Biol 2010, 8:28.
Agate RJ, Scott BB, Haripal B, Lois C, Nottebohm F: Transgenic songbirds
offer an opportunity to develop a genetic model for vocal learning. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:17963-17967.
UCSC Genome Bioinformatic [http://genome.ucsc.edu]
Avian Genomes [http://aviangenomes.org]

doi:10.1186/jbiol222
Cite this article as: Pinaud R: Genome of a songbird unveiled. Journal of
Biology 2010, 9:19.

