Driscoll and Macdonald Journal of Biology 2010, 9:10
http://jbiol.com/content/9/2/10

OPINION

Top dogs: wolf domestication and wealth
Carlos A Driscoll1,2 and David W Macdonald*1
See research article http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/16/

Abstract
A phylogeographic analysis of gene sequences
important in determining body size in dogs, recently
published in BMC Biology, traces the appearance of
small body size to the Neolithic Middle East. This
finding strengthens the association of this event with
the development of sedentary societies, and perhaps
even has implications for the inception of human social
inequality.

Domestication is a peculiarly human endeavor. The idea
that we can learn about ourselves by studying man-made
animals is well worn, and considerable eﬀort has been put
to the cause [1,2]. Although dogs are surely the ﬁrst
domesticate [3], the history regarding the location of their
transformation from wolves, and the peoples responsible
for it, has been confusing, with genetic evidence pointing
to Europe, the Far East and places in between [4-6].
Although other waves of domestication - of chickens,
some pigs, llamas, and water buﬀalo, among others - took
place in China and the Americas [7], most of the Western
barnyard animals and the cat were domesticated between
12,000 and 8,000 years ago in a region of the Middle East
known as the Fertile Crescent [7-10] and are exclusively
the product of a sedentary, agricultural, civilized life
[7,9,11]. Dogs have been considered as an important
exception, the suspicion being that they were domesticated earlier and (perhaps) elsewhere, the product of a
still more distant and primitive hunter-gatherer past [12]
(Figure  1). The conventional thinking has been that
wolves, being highly mobile, were naturally well equipped
to follow bands of hunters, of no ﬁxed address, as they
roved the end of the Paleolithic in search of game. Protodogs might have scavenged kills left behind by humans as
they moved in search of new game, gradually becoming

*Correspondence: david.macdonald@zoo.ox.ac.uk
1
Wildlife Conservation Research Unit, The Recanati-Kaplan Centre, Department of
Zoology, University of Oxford, Tubney House, Abingdon Road, Tubney, Abingdon
OX13 5QL, UK
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

© 2010 BioMed Central Ltd

© 2010 BioMed Central Ltd

accustomed to human contact until, over generations, a
fully domesticated dog evolved, ready to be put to work [9].
A recent paper in BMC Biology by Gray et al. [13]
enables the dog’s tale to be viewed through a diﬀerent
prism, bringing genetics into line with archeology, and
shining a light (yet again) on the Middle East as the locus
of dog domestication, or at least of the appearance of
small dogs, and, more importantly, by suggesting that the
wolf-dog barrier was jumped at about the time when
human communities became settled. This report [13] is
noteworthy because it illuminates the origin of small
dogs, suggesting a new focus for artiﬁcial selection, but
also because it provokes an intriguing view of human
civilization that puts dogs in the role of not just a
treasured companion, but a precursor to wealth and
inequality! We present that view in the spirit of
speculative musing.

Let sleeping dogs lie
Although there is little doubt that dogs have a single
Eurasian origin from the wolf, Canis lupus, and soon
spread to Africa, Europe, Australasia and the Americas
[3-6,13-15], interpreting the detail of their molecular
history has otherwise been diﬃcult. Phylogeography is
an approach that involves the simultaneous study of both
temporal and spatial genetic patterns, but phylogeographic patterns that might have illuminated dog origins
have been obscured by such factors as their mobility, and
that of their human companions, the practice of line
breeding (to form ‘breeds’), which has isolated and
highlighted rare genetic features, and crossing between
breeds. The whereabouts of the wolf population that
genetically most closely resembles the dog is prima facie
evidence for where domestication ﬁrst occurred.
Mitochondria’s indeliquescent phylogenetic signal and
matrilineal transmission (often resulting in geographically localized patterns) has made mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) the workhorse of phylogeographic research,
including the quest for dog origins or the dog’s ancestors.
However, despite large sample sizes and sophisticated
analytical techniques, mtDNA has proved peculiarly poor
at reconstructing dog origins, to the extent that there are
almost as many diﬀerent imputed locations for the dog’s
origins as there are studies [4-6]. This is, in part, because
mtDNA represents only a fraction of the genome, and is

Driscoll and Macdonald Journal of Biology 2010, 9:10
http://jbiol.com/content/9/2/10

Page 2 of 6

Figure 1. Petroglyphs from Drakensbergs of South Africa illustrating an early hunt with dogs in a manner perhaps analogous to that of
the earliest hunter gatherers. Picture used with permission from Vinnicombe P. 1979. People of the Eland: Rock paintings of the Drakenbergs
Bushmen as a reflection of their life and thought. Pietermaritzberg: University of Natal Press.

subject to a strong sex bias [4]. Moreover, wolves are
highly mobile, resulting in scant geographic patterning in
their genetics and, worse, dogs can interbreed with
regional native wolf populations [4,13].
Gray et al. [13] use four genomic datasets (single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), microsatellite, short
interspersed nuclear element (SINE) and DNA sequence
to investigate the region around the insulin-like growth
factor 1 (IGF1) gene on dog chromosome 15, thereby
avoiding many of the pitfalls noted above that have
obscured dog origins. By imputing phase (that is, the
ordering of markers/genes on a particular chromosome
of the pair), they characterized a haplotype found in all
small dogs (that is dogs of less than 9 kg) from schnauzers
to Chihuahuas, but not in wild canids nor in most large
dog breeds. They deduce that the small dog haplotype
(SDH) is derived, arising soon after the domestication of
dogs. This SDH is most closely related to that found in
wolves from the Middle East, suggesting that region as its
origin. Provided that Middle Eastern wolves today most
closely resemble Middle Eastern wolves of yesteryear,
then a fair inference is that the SDH descends from
Middle Eastern wolves.
Although some archaeological estimates for domestication go back as far as 31,000 years ago to central Europe
[16], it is more generally agreed that dog domestication
occurred between 13,000 and 17,000 years ago (see
Table  1 of [9]; because this time is too recent for the

molecular clock to tick reliably, estimates must be made
on the basis of archaeological excavations alone). These
earliest dog remains are found in the Levantine wing of
the Fertile Crescent [17,18] from a time when the humans
there, the Natuﬁans, were hunter-gatherers, although
they lived in permanent or semi-permanent settlements.
This narrow transition between Paleolithic nomadic
hunter-gathering and the comparatively advanced settled
agro-economies of the Neolithic was a critical stage of
cultural development and, perhaps, in canine history, was
the moment in which wolves crossed the canine Rubicon.
This moment of history sets the stage for interpreting the
study of Gray et al. [13]. These genetic data may not alone
be suﬃcient to prove that dogs were domesticated solely
in the Middle East, although they do very strongly
suggest it to be a dominant center. Furthermore, the
coincidence in the Middle East of both the origin of
human settlement (sedentism) and agriculture on the one
hand, and dog diversiﬁcation on the other, merits a
deeper, if declaredly speculative, look.

Puppy love: why wolf domestication?
There may be increasing consensus on where and when
wolves were domesticated, but the how and why are still
largely conjectural. But, as the sketch of dog evolution
(Figure 2) begins to be colored in, the textures of the
overlapping processes of natural and artiﬁcial selection
are revealed. Domestication is the result of interwoven

Driscoll and Macdonald Journal of Biology 2010, 9:10
http://jbiol.com/content/9/2/10

Page 3 of 6

Basenji, Dingo, NGSD and ancient breeds
‘Small’ breed, SDH universal
<(SDH origin)

Middle Eastern wolf

Dump dogs

Village dogs
‘Large’ breeds
(Infusion of
northern
wolf genes)

Northern wolves

China, Russia, Italy, Spain,
Alaska, Yellowstone

Figure 2. Illustration of the two stages of shrinking in size of Canis lupus during wolf domestication and small dog development. The first
size reduction occurred during evolution by natural selection of free-ranging, naturally self-supporting wolves into those dependent on scavenging
around human settlements for food. This reduction was part and parcel of wolf domestication. A second size reduction, by artificial selection,
occurred post-domestication, in one dog lineage, and resulted in the ancestor of the small breeds found today worldwide. The approximate timing
of the development of this ‘small dog haplotype’ (SDH) [13] is shown (using the example of the New Guinea Singing Dog (NGSD), one of many
‘ancient breeds’).

biological and cultural processes [19]. Indeed, the reasons
why domestication did not happen in many aboriginal
societies were probably cultural. Some have gone so far
as to say that animals have to be owned to be domesticated [19], although by more recent understandings this
may not be precisely true. Although the burial together of
a puppy with a human [17] suggests a strong emotional
bond between them, wolves were probably not initially
domesticated as pets [20].
The initial association of wolves and humans was
doubtless instigated by the wolves [9,21]. But, insofar as
domestication did not happen overnight, there must have
been cultural continuity of wolf tolerance initially and of
proto-dog keeping subsequently. A plausible scenario is
that proto-domestic wolves were resident scavengers at
the rubbish dumps of permanent settlements rather than
nomadic camp followers: both wolves and dogs continue
in much this role in some places today [22]. Indeed, they
perpetuate the general canid dynamic of intraguild
competition [23] whereby smaller canids (in this case
smaller, domesticated, doggish wolves) can survive the
aggression of larger ones (wild wolvish wolves) only with
access to a refuge - in this case the umbrella, intended or
otherwise, of a companion animal, namely humans. By
analogy, and perhaps in a direct parallel, molecular
evidence shows that contemporary wild wolf populations the migratory wolves of the tundra compared with
territorial populations of the boreal forest - do not
interbreed although they overlap geographically for
much of the year [24]. These diﬀerent lifestyles promote
reproductive isolation in ways perhaps reminiscent of the
divergence of proto-dogs and wolves.

This opening stage of domestication seems to have
initiated the shrinking in size of the wolf. The ﬁrst ‘dog’
remains in the Near East are considered dogs in part
because of their reduced size [25,26]. Small stature
presumably reduces energy demand, and perhaps even
allows the ‘Lupus-light’ to ﬁt in more snugly with people
than could its lumbering antecedent. To speculate yet
more wildly, perhaps intraguild competition then led to
small garbage-wolves that became vigilant barkers at the
approach of larger and hostile wolves and, in so doing,
further divided the population genetically. This series of
developments would set up the assortative mating
theoretically required for the sympatric divergence of the
wolf population [9].
Once in the thrall of humans and their enterprises,
dogs became the object of unnatural attention. It seems
plausible that the spontaneous occurrence of a ‘small’
dog, selected on post-zygotic whim favoring the survival
of particularly appealing puppies (to quote Ray Coppinger,
“freaks can be valuable”) encouraged match-making
‘kennel clubs’ to breed these small dogs with one another,
preserving the morphotype [27,28] (this blend of preand post-zygotic selection in domestication is alluded to
in [9]). Although the SDH-associated causal mutation for
smallness in dogs has not yet been identiﬁed [13], given
that SDH clusters in toy dogs, it seems to track one form
or another of dwarﬁsm. Interestingly, dachshunds and
Brittany spaniels (which are not toy dogs and do not
carry SDH) also show a strong signature of selection in
the gene region that includes IGF, suggesting that the
IGF signaling pathway has been the target of artiﬁcial
selection numerous times through history [27]. Beyond

Driscoll and Macdonald Journal of Biology 2010, 9:10
http://jbiol.com/content/9/2/10

the fact that ‘small breeds’ were perpetuated and spread
from their origin in the Middle East across Eurasia, it is
this second, saltatory size reduction that indicates a
signiﬁcant degree of human attentiveness. We speculate
that these Natuﬁans, having originally selected runts on a
whim, thereafter not only perpetuated their whimsy selecting for cuddliness - but also began selecting for pintsized functionality (such as ratting and entering burrows).

The dogged pursuit of wealth
Being signiﬁcantly smaller than the competition - the
process of ‘diminution’, as here traced for dogs [13] - is
likely to be maladaptive in the wild; this trait was
therefore probably selected under the inﬂuence of people.
This conclusion sheds a quizzical light on human history,
provoking a major question regarding the origin of
Neolithic civilization. What came ﬁrst - the social order
(divisions of labor and class) or the means of production
(agriculture versus hunting-gathering)? One hypothesis
holds that the means of production came ﬁrst; that is,
people learned to farm, which led to an accumulation of
wealth that in turn promoted the development of a tiered
social order [2]. This view generally discounts culture,
ascribing success instead to luck in the geographical
lottery - some people lived in fertile, resource-rich areas
while others did not. But it could have happened the
other way around - stable social orders were established
ﬁrst and these were a prerequisite that facilitated domestication and farming. Without denying the necessity of
technological innovations, this view weights cultural
institutions much more heavily [7].
Dogs are the earliest domesticates, predating barnyard
animals by 1,000 to 5,000 years or more [9]. Gray et al.
[13] provide evidence that early Middle Eastern dogs
segregate for a character, non-adaptive in the wild, that is
probably the result of long-term association with humans
and must have occurred over many human generations.
We can infer from this that these human cultures were
sedentary and stable (at least enough to support
development of smallness in early dogs), and had some
loose cultural concept of tolerance for dogs, if not of
caring and ownership of them. This supports the view
that those societal institutions presumably required for a
long-lasting, stable settlement to function had developed
before the domestication of barnyard animals, perhaps
even providing the circumstances that enabled those
domestications to take place [7]. Domestication is a key
feature of the Neolithic Revolution, a suite of cultural
innovations and consequences comprising sedentism, an
agricultural economy, and complex social arrangements
conducive to urban living.
The Neolithic Revolution had many unpredictable
consequences, including elaborate politics, runaway
population growth, taxes and social inequality. Recently,

Page 4 of 6

the foundations of social inequality have been traced to
variability in the inter-generational transmission of
wealth [29,30]. A parent’s wealth is the best predictor of
oﬀspring’s wealth, and the more eﬀective the vertical
transmission of wealth, the more pronounced the
inequality over generations. Wealth can be material,
social or knowledge-based, but material wealth is most
transmissible [29]. Thus, economies where material
wealth is important are expected to show substantial
levels of social inequality.
Material wealth becomes more important as societies
progress from hunter-gatherer, where food and other
resources are by their nature open-sourced, to agrarian,
where wealth is more easily inherited. As suggested by
Borgerhoﬀ Mulder et al. [29], the earliest form of
eﬀectively heritable material wealth is domestic animals
as livestock. Interestingly, it seems that household and
farm utensils have much lower inter-generational
transmission coeﬃcients than do livestock (see Table 1 in
[29]). And even in ‘small-scale societies’ today (those,
sensu Borgerhoﬀ Mulder et al., in which the inﬂuence of
nation states is limited), livestock are the very stuﬀ of
wealth and, along with the land associated with raising it,
the means by which wealth is transferred to succeeding
generations. These aspects of wealth remain the best
predictors of wealth continuity in these societies. This
link between domesticates (as wealth) and societal
inequality implies that the archeological presence of
domesticates can be an important indicator of when
inequality of wealth began, and hence indicates the
degree of institutional development in the society that
left indications of them. If so, we speculate whether the
process that Borgerhoﬀ Mulder et al. ([29] and others
cited therein) have described, whereby domesticated
barnyard stock are at the foundations of modern wealthbased institutions, could logically be extended back in
time several thousand years to have its seeds in the
domestication of dogs.
Dogs are the only pre-agricultural domesticate [9].
Dogs did not have to be food in order to pay their way.
Rather, they paid dividends to their human companions
who beneﬁted from channeling the native predatory
abilities and territorial proclivities of dogs to increase
hunting success and be useful as sentries. And nothing
about the small stature that presumably aided a canine
peri-domestic life precluded a dog from beneﬁting the
hunt, acting as sentries or as sport. Noting the contemporary success of another small canid in urban settings
[31], dogs could be considered the lupine analog of
contemporary suburban red foxes, although wolﬁsh
sociality may better pre-adapt them to living with people,
as distinct from living alongside them as foxes do.
Moreover, as property, dogs are likely to have become
status symbols as well as being intrinsically valuable.

Driscoll and Macdonald Journal of Biology 2010, 9:10
http://jbiol.com/content/9/2/10

Page 5 of 6

civilization. These cultural developments provided the
milieu for the interwoven processes of artiﬁcial selection
and cultural acclimatization that resulted in biological
changes leading, in steps, to the dogs of today. This
speculation would put dogs at the forefront of the
innovations that resulted in the rise and spread of urban
life and its sensibilities. Dogs would have been a primer
for the notion, crucial to the success of agriculturalism,
that individual animals could be chattels, thereby
providing society’s introduction to dealing with later
complexities like the inheritance of livestock and other
material goods. Seen in this way, dogs might be
harbingers of agriculturalism and the beginning of the
end for the hunter-gatherer way, not just legacies of it.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Ray Coppinger, Adam Dutton and Robert Wayne for their
insights and comments on an earlier draft, and to Dawn Burnham for her quest
for canine art.

Figure 3. That at least some people, and often trend-setters,
have long valued dogs is reflected in their prominence in art
from Neolithic times to the present. In this case, Ruebens pictures
Diana (Artemis) the goddess of hunting, with a hound center stage.

Indeed, the recent radiation of modern breeds in the
Victorian era followed lines of class and wealth, and may
be a modern example of the process. Thus, despite the
fact that in many contemporary indigenous societies
dogs appear to be only loosely owned and little valued, it
does not seem implausible that early dogs were valued by
their companion humans. Such value would make them
objects of inter-generational wealth, and hence qualify as
a vehicle for inequality. The fact that contemporary
primitive societies often treat dogs badly does not mean
that some individuals do (and did) not value them, and to
judge by their depictions alongside goddesses like
Rubens’ Diana (Figure  3), one might guess that some of
the people that valued them were trend-setters!
The early value of dogs might take several forms - the
fact that the king got the pick of every litter in the ancient
Paciﬁc doubtless gave dogs prestige (even if he then ate
them) and Margaret Titcomb [32] has it that these early
dogs were valued for converting inedible waste into
usable protein. Even cultures that are generally unattracted
to dogs nonetheless may perceive derived beneﬁts from
them. The fact is, people like dogs, and vice versa. Given
this, it is not unreasonable to view dogs as wealth perhaps even the ﬁrst ‘living capital’. If dogs are wealth,
then, as the earliest domesticate, might not man’s best
friend also be, ironically, a precursor to (or an indicator
of ) social inequality in the earliest civilizations.
The accumulating archeological, cultural and genetic
evidence emphasizes that wolf domestication cannot be
understood outside of the context of early sedentism and

Author details
1
Wildlife Conservation Research Unit, The Recanati-Kaplan Centre, Department
of Zoology, University of Oxford, Tubney House, Abingdon Road, Tubney,
Abingdon OX13 5QL, UK
2
Laboratory of Genomic Diversity, Genetics Section, Bldg 560, Rm 11-26,
National Cancer Institute-Frederick Cancer Research Facility, Frederick,
Maryland 21702-1201, USA
Published: 24 February 2010
References
1. Clutton-Brock J: The Walking Larder: Patterns of Domestication, Pastoralism, and
Predation. London/Boston: Unwin Hyman; 1989.
2. Diamond JM: Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies. New York:
Norton; 2005.
3. Hemmer H: Domestication: The Decline of Environmental Appreciation.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 1990.
4. Boyko AR, Boyko RH, Boyko CM, Parker HG, Castelhano M, Corey L,
Degenhardt JD, Auton A, Hedimbi M, Kityo R, Ostrander EA, Schoenebeck J,
Todhunter RJ, Jones P, Bustamante CD: Complex population structure in
African village dogs and its implications for inferring dog domestication
history. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:13903-13908
5. Pang JF, Kluetsch C, Zou XJ, Zhang AB, Luo LY, Angleby H, Ardalan A, Ekström
C, Sköllermo A, Lundeberg J, Matsumura S, Leitner T, Zhang YP, Savolainen P:
mtDNA data indicate a single origin for dogs south of Yangtze River, less
than 16,300 years ago, from numerous wolves. Mol Biol Evol 2009,
26:2849-2864.
6. Verginelli F, Capelli C, Coia V, Musiani M, Falchetti M, Ottini L, Palmirotta R,
Tagliacozzo A, De Grossi Mazzorin I, Mariani-Costantini R: Mitochondrial DNA
from prehistoric canids highlights relationships between dogs and SouthEast European wolves. Mol Biol Evol 2005, 22:2541-2551.
7. Smith BD: The Emergence of Agriculture. New York: WH Freeman; 1995.
8. Driscoll CA, Clutton-Brock J, Kitchener AC, O’Brien SJ: The taming of the cat.
Sci Am 2009, 300:68-75.
9. Driscoll CA, Macdonald DW, O’Brien SJ: From wild animals to domestic pets,
an evolutionary view of domestication. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009,
106(Suppl 1):9971-9978.
10. Driscoll CA, Menotti-Raymond M, Roca AL, Hupe K, Johnson WE, Geffen E,
Harley EH, Delibes M, Pontier D, Kitchener AC, Yamaguchi N, O’brien SJ,
Macdonald DW: The Near Eastern origin of cat domestication. Science 2007,
317:519-523.
11. Clutton-Brock J: A Natural History of Domesticated Mammals. 2nd edn.
Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press; 1999.
12. Clutton-Brock J: Origins of the domestic dog: domestication and early
history. In The Domestic Dog: Its Evolution, Behaviour, and Interactions with
People. Edited by Serpell J. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 1995:7-20.
13. Gray MM, Sutter NB, Ostrander EA, Wayne RK: The IGF1 small dog haplotype

Driscoll and Macdonald Journal of Biology 2010, 9:10
http://jbiol.com/content/9/2/10

is derived from Middle Eastern gray wolves. BMC Biol 2010, 8:16.
14. Macdonald DW: The Velvet Claw: A Natural History of the Carnivores. London:
BBC Books; 1993.
15. Wang X, Tedford RH, Van Valkenburgh B, Wayne RK: Ancestry - evolutionary
history, molecular systematics, and evolutionary ecology of Canidae.
In The Biology and Conservation of Wild Canids. Edited by Macdonald DW,
Sillero-Zubiri C. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2004:38-54.
16. Germonpré M, Sablin MV, Stevens RE, Hedges REM, Hofreier M, Stiller M,
Després VR: Fossil dogs and wolves from Palaeolithic sites in Belgium, the
Ukraine and Russia: osteometry, ancient DNA and stable isotopes.
J Archaeol Sci 2009, 36:473-490.
17. Davis SJM, Valla FR: Evidence for domestication of the dog 12,000 years ago
in the Natuﬁan of Israel. Nature 1978, 276:608-610.
18. Tchernov E, Valla FF: Two new dogs, and other Natuﬁan dogs, from the
southern Levant. J Archaeol Sci 1997, 24:65-95.
19. Clutton-Brock J: The process of domestication. Mammal Rev 1992, 22:79-85.
20. Serpell J: Pet-keeping and animal domestication: a reappraisal. In The
Walking Larder: Patterns of Domestication, Pastoralism, and Predation. Edited by
Clutton-Brock J. London: Unwin; 1989:10-21.
21. Coppinger R, Coppinger L: Dogs: A Startling New Understanding of Canine
Origin, Behavior, and Evolution. New York: Scribner; 2001.
22. Macdonald DW, Carr GM: Variation in dog society: between resource
dispersion and social ﬂux. In The Domestic Dog, Its Evolution, Behaviour and
Interactions with People. Edited by Serpell J. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press; 1995:199-216.
23. Moehrenschlager A, List R, Macdonald DW: Escaping intraguild predation:
Mexican kit foxes survive while coyotes and golden eagles kill Canadian
swift foxes. J Mammal 2007, 88:1029-1039.
24. Musiani M, Leonard JA, Cluff HD, Gates CC, Mariani S, Paquet PC, Vilas C,
Wayne RK: Diﬀerentiation of tundra/taiga and boreal coniferous forest
wolves: genetics, coat colour and association with migratory caribou. Mol

Page 6 of 6

Ecol 2007, 16:4149-4170.
25. Davis S J M, Valla VR, Francois R: Evidence for domestication of the dog
12,000 years ago in the Natuﬁan of Israel. Nature 1978, 276: 608-610.
26. Tchernov E, Valla VR: Two new dogs, and other Natuﬁan dogs, from the
southern Levant. J Archaeol Sci 1997, 24:65-95.
27. Akey JM, Ruhe AL, Akey DT, Wong AK, Connelly CF, Madeoy J, Nicholas TJ, Neff
MW: Tracking footprints of artiﬁcial selection in the dog genome. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 2010, 107:1160-1165.
28. Parker HG, Kim LV, Sutter NB, Carlson S, Lorentzen TD, Malek TB, Johnson GS,
DeFrance HB, Ostrander EA, Kruglyak L: Genetic structure of the purebred
domestic dog. Science 2004, 304:1160-1164.
29. Borgerhoff Mulder M, Bowles S, Hertz T, Bell A, Beise J, Clark G, Fazzio I,
Gurven M, Hill K, Hooper PL, Irons W, Kaplan H, Leonetti D, Low B, Marlowe F,
McElreath R, Naidu S, Nolin D, Piraino P, Quinlan R, Schniter E, Sear R, Shenk M,
Smith EA, von Rueden C, Wiessner P: Intergenerational wealth transmission
and the dynamics of inequality in small-scale societies. Science 2009,
326:682-688.
30. Acemoglu D, Robinson J: Foundations of societal inequality. Science 2009,
326:678-679.
31. Macdonald DW: Running with the Fox. New York: Facts on File Publications;
1987.
32. Titcomb M: Dogs and Man in the Ancient Pacific with Special Attention to
Hawaii. Honolulu, HI: Star-Bulletin Print Co.; 1969. [Bernice P. Bishop Museum
Special Publication, volume 59]

doi:10.1186/jbiol226
Cite this article as: Driscoll CA, Macdonald DW: Top dogs: wolf
domestication and wealth. Journal of Biology 2010, 9:10.

