Minireview

Adaptation by introgression
Michael L Arnold* and Noland H Martin†

Addresses: *Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia 30602, USA. †Department of Biology, Texas State University,
San Marcos, Texas 78666, USA.
Correspondence: Michael L Arnold. Email: arnold@plantbio.uga.edu

Abstract
Both selective and random processes can affect the outcome of
natural hybridization. A recent analysis in BMC Evolutionary
Biology of natural hybridization between an introduced and a
native salamander reveals the mosaic nature of introgression,
which is probably caused by a combination of selection and
demography.

Natural interspecific hybridization has been observed in a
diverse array of taxa [1-3], and the production of such
hybrids can have a wide range of evolutionary conse­
quences. For instance, natural hybridization can act as a
‘destructive’ force, resulting in the fusion of taxa that do
not reveal strong reproductive isolation [1]. Alternatively,
it can result in evolutionary novelty via the production of
new reproductively isolated hybrid species [1-3], or by the
transfer of potentially adaptive traits through a process
known as introgressive hybridization. In a recent article in
BMC Evolutionary Biology, Fitzpatrick et al. [4] tested for
introgressive hybridization by performing a genome-wide
scan of native salamander (Ambystoma californiense) popu­
lations, and identified genomic regions that have rapidly
fixed alternative alleles derived from a recently intro­duced,
invasive species (Ambystoma mavortium). This rapid
assimilation of non-native alleles suggests that selective
processes were involved in their fixation.
Introgressive hybridization is a multi-step process by
which genetic material from one population infiltrates into
another, genetically differentiated population [5]. In order
for introgressive hybridization to take place, F1 hybrids
must initially be produced between the two species. In
nature, such hybrid formation is often a rare event owing
to the presence of multiple prezygotic and postzygotic
reproductive barriers [1], and indeed in most species-pairs
studied to date, the frequencies of F1 hybrid formation are
low [1]. However, even if the F1 hybrids possess only partial
fitness, they may mate with one or both progenitor species
to produce first-generation backcross (BC1) hybrids. These
BC1 hybrids may further backcross with pure-species
individuals, ultimately resulting in the transfer of novel
alleles between the hybridizing lineages/species [5].

http://jbiol.com/content/8/9/82	

A key question with respect to introgressive hybridization
is ‘To what degree is interspecific gene flow the result of
adaptive processes?’ Whereas hybridization can certainly
result in the transfer of alleles and traits across species
boundaries [1], such genetic exchange does not necessarily
involve the transfer of adaptations. Stochastic processes
(that is, random genetic drift) could potentially explain
introgression events, and deciphering the roles of sto­
chastic and deterministic (that is, natural selection) pro­
cesses has often proved difficult. Only a handful of exam­
ples are currently available that provide rigorous tests for
adaptive introgression [6-11]. Given the scarcity of such
analyses, the recent study of Fitzpatrick et al. [4] reporting
on signatures of adaptive introgression in salamanders is a
significant contribution. Here, we review four examples
(including [4]) that have used four different methodologies
to test for adaptive introgression.

Evidence for adaptive introgression in plants

Helianthus
Heiser [6] inferred the annual sunflower subspecies, Helian­
thus annuus texanus, to be a stabilized hybrid resulting from
the introgression of a small number of Helianthus debilis genes
into a predominately H. a. annuus genome. Kim and Rieseberg
[7] demonstrated that the introgression of only three small
H.  debilis genomic regions (containing three morphological
quantitative trait loci (QTLs)) was sufficient to recapitulate the
H. a. texanus phenotype (see [12] for a discussion of the para­
meters of QTL analyses). This unique phenotype includes a
combination of traits gained apparently from either H. a.
annuus (for example, the shape of bracts surrounding the
flower head and the shape of the fruits) or H. debilis (for
example, stem speck­ling and fruit size) [6,7]. Significantly,
Whitney et al. [8] presented evidence that the introgression of
H. debilis genomic material into a H. a. annuus genetic back­
ground not only accounted for the unique morphology of H. a.
texanus, but also resulted in adaptive introgression. Specifi­
cally, the increased herbivore resistance of H. debilis was trans­
ferred into BC1 hybrids towards H. a. annuus.
Iris
The second example of adaptive trait transfer comes from
studies of two species of Louisiana Iris: the flood-tolerant

Arnold and Martin: Journal of Biology 2009, 8:82

82.2

Table 1
Number and fraction of Iris fulva, Iris brevicaulis and their
hybrids that survived an extended flooding event
Genotypic class	

Alive	

Dead	

Fraction survived

I. brevicaulis	

0	

13	

0

BCIB	

23	

393	

0.055

BCIF	

33	

325	

0.092

I. fulva	

3	

8	

0.273

BCIB and BCIF, BC1 hybrids towards I. brevicaulis and I. fulva,
respectively, as judged by genotype. Data adapted from [9].

Iris fulva and the dry-adapted Iris brevicaulis. Martin et
al. [9] combined an analysis of QTLs (using reciprocal BC1
mapping populations) with a highly selective, natural field
experiment. The highly selective nature of the experiment
involved an intensive, long-term flooding event in which
the various genotypes were submerged for approximately
four months. This study determined that I. fulva genotypes
survived flooding at significantly higher frequencies than
any other genotypic class (Table 1), including I. brevicaulis
(none of the latter survived [9]). The ability to withstand
these extreme conditions was shown to have a genetic
basis, with survivorship of backcrosses towards I. brevicaulis
strongly influenced by the presence of a number of intro­
gressed alleles from flood-tolerant I. fulva [9]. Further­
more, in the backcrosses towards I. fulva, two QTLs of
major effect were detected that influenced flood tolerance,
one of which (perhaps surprisingly) included introgressed
alleles from the dry-adapted I. brevicaulis. These findings,
and those for Helianthus, demonstrate the potential for
adaptive introgression to affect the evolutionary trajectory
of hybrid plant populations.

Evidence for adaptive introgression in animals

Mus
Surveys of numerous loci across natural hybrid zones
between the mouse species Mus musculus and Mus
domesticus have been made. The detail obtained by
applying a genomics approach to natural populations has
allowed tests for deviations from neutral introgression reflecting both positive and negative selection [10,11].
Payseur et al. [10] detected X-chromosome loci that were
apparently prevented from introgressing across a zone of
hybridization between the two mouse species in southern
Germany and western Austria. The lack of penetration was
hypothesized to mark genomic regions contributing to the
partial reproductive isolation between M. musculus and M.
domesticus, as caused by selection against hybrids con­
taining an admixture of heterospecific loci (that is, loci
from the other species) [10]. In contrast, some X-chromo­
some alleles of M. domesticus were found at higher than
expected frequencies in populations of mice on the
M. musculus side of the hybrid zone. These loci suggested

http://jbiol.com/content/8/9/82	

“…the possibility that positive selection may act to drive
the spread of alleles from one species on to the genomic
background of the other species…” (that is, reflecting
adaptive trait introgression [10]). Selection can thus act in
different ‘directions’ (either positively or negatively) on
different portions of the genomes of hybrids. This
differential selection results in introgression being favored
or disfavored, depending upon the traits generated from
the loci contained in the various genomic regions.
Loci distributed across the Mus autosomes also exhibited
patterns of differential introgression. For example, Teeter
et al. [11] reported restricted introgression for numerous
loci, indicative of epistatic interactions contributing to
lower hybrid fitness. These ‘reproductive isolation’ loci
included genes that affect reproductive characteristics and
responses to environmental cues [11]. Although there was
evidence for selection against the introgression of certain
genomic regions, patterns of genetic variation also
identified regions of high-frequency introgression. Consis­
tent with previous findings for the X-chromosome loci
[10], most of the introgression involved the occurrence of
alleles from M. domesticus in a largely M. musculus genetic
background [11]. These loci included genes that underlie
cell signaling, olfaction and response to pheromones, and
are thus good candidates for adaptive introgression.
Ambystoma
In their work with Ambystoma, Fitzpatrick et al. [4] have
provided an excellent test of the hypothesis of mosaicism
in the genomes of hybridizing taxa. Their analysis is
particularly powerful because they possessed historical
records indicating that natural hybridization between the
native salamander species, A. californiense, and the intro­
duced A. mavortium (or A. t. mavortium) had begun
during the 1940s. The short time period since the forma­
tion of the hybrid zone between these species allowed a
sensitive assay for the presence or absence of deviations
from expected allele frequencies. Such deviations (or lack
thereof) would be indicative of the impact of selective and/
or stochastic factors on different genomic regions. The
analysis of 64 loci, spread across the salamander genomes,
from animals collected inside the hybrid zone detected
mosaics of conspecific and heterospecific alleles. Both
stochastic and deterministic processes accounted for this
mosaicism [4]. However, Figure 1 summarizes the “most
striking result” [4] from the analysis of hybrid Ambystoma
populations. Specifically, Fitzpatrick et al. [4] detected
three out of the 64 loci that were fixed, or nearly fixed, for
the non-native alleles. The observation that the frequencies
of these three non-native alleles were elevated across all
five of the ponds sampled substantiates the inference of
selection-favored (that is, adaptive) introgression [4]. Only
one genomic region revealed evidence for selection against
heterozygotes, while the remaining 60 markers did not
deviate from neutral expectations.

Arnold and Martin: Journal of Biology 2009, 8:82

82.3

‘foreign’ evolutionary lineage while retaining large stretches
of non-introgressed genomic material [1-3].

(a)

0.8

Determining the evolutionary forces, whether stochastic or
deterministic, that resulted in the introgression (or lack
thereof) of foreign DNA is a primary question for students
of natural hybridization. In this regard, the findings for
Helianthus, Iris, Mus and Ambystoma indicate that
models of evolutionary change remain inadequate when
they neglect the role of divergence in the face of gene flow.
When the process of introgression is one of the factors
tested for in evolutionary analyses, it is often found. This
genetic transfer, as reflected by genomes with an admixture
of components from various lineages, is almost certainly
indicative of the role of both stochastic and deterministic
processes. Furthermore, unlike previous conclusions drawn
when data were lacking (see [1] for a discussion of this
debate), it is now apparent that the deterministic portion of
the equation includes selection favoring the introgression of
some alleles and traits (see, for example, [7-11]).

0.4

0.0
(b)

0.8

Introduced allele frequency

0.4

0.0
(c)

0.8

0.4

0.0
(d)

0.8

0.4

Acknowledgements

NHM was supported by National Science Foundation grant DEB0816905.

0.0
(e)

0.8

References
1.	

0.4

0.0
0

1,000

2,000

3,000

4,000

5,000

Genomic position (cM)

Figure 1
Allele frequencies for 64 marker loci across the Ambystoma
genome. (a-e) Allele frequency data from five separate ponds [4].
The points marked in red reflect three loci that show selectiondriven introgression from the introduced species A. mavortium (or
A. t. mavortium) into the native A. californiense.

Mosaic genomes

As discussed above, and by previous authors [1-3], both
deterministic and stochastic factors will affect the evolu­
tionary and ecological trajectories of hybrid popula­tions.
In particular, it has been suggested that selection against
hybrids balanced by continual hybridiza­tion between the
interacting taxa will play the major role in hybrid zone
evolution [1]. In contrast, others have argued for a differ­
ential selective coefficient depending upon which portions
of the genomes of the hybridizing taxa are examined
[1-4,7‑11]. In that conceptual framework, the genomes of
hybridizing organisms would reflect the combined action of
negative selection, positive selection and neutral diffusion of
alleles from the alternative taxon. The genomes of organisms
affected by differential introgression would thus be mosaics,
possessing some cassettes of genomic material from the

http://jbiol.com/content/8/9/82	

Arnold ML: Evolution Through Genetic Exchange. Oxford:
Oxford University Press: 2006.
2.	 Rieseberg LH: Hybrid origins of plant species. Annu Rev
Ecol Syst 1997, 28:359-389.
3.	 Seehausen O: Hybridization and adaptive radiation. Trends
Ecol Evol 2004, 19:198-207.
4.	 Fitzpatrick BM, Johnson JR, Kump DK, Shaffer HB, Smith JJ,
Voss SR: Rapid fixation of non-native alleles revealed by
genome-wide SNP analysis of hybrid Tiger Salamanders.
BMC Evol Biol 2009, 9:176.
5.	 Anderson E, Hubricht L: Hybridization in Tradescantia. III.
The evidence for introgressive hybridization. Amer J Bot
1938, 25:396-402.
6.	 Heiser CB Jr: Variation and subspeciation in the common
sunflower, Helianthus annuus. Amer Midl Nat 1954, 51:287305.
7.	 Kim S-C, Rieseberg LH: Genetic architecture of species differences in annual sunflowers: Implications for adaptive
trait introgression. Genetics 1999, 153:965-977.
8.	 Whitney KD, Randell RA, Rieseberg LH: Adaptive introgression of herbivore resistance traits in the weedy sunflower
Helianthus annuus. Am Nat 2006, 167. [Epub ahead of print]
9.	 Martin NH, Bouck AC, Arnold ML: Detecting adaptive trait
introgression between Iris fulva and I. brevicaulis in highly
selective field conditions. Genetics 2006, 172:2481-2489.
10.	 Payseur BA, Krenz JG, Nachman MW: Differential patterns
of introgression across the X chromosome in a hybrid
zone between two species of house mice. Evolution 2004,
58:​2064-2078.
11.	 Teeter KC, Payseur BA, Harris LW, Bakewell MA, Thibodeau
LM, O’Brien JE, Krenz JG, Sans-Fuentes MA, Nachman MW,
Tucker PK: Genome-wide patterns of gene flow across a
house mouse hybrid zone. Genome Res 2008, 18:67-76.
12.	 Mackay TF: Genetic analysis of quantitative traits. J Biol
2009, 8:23.
Published: 13 October 2009
doi:10.1186/jbiol176
© 2009 BioMed Central Ltd

Arnold and Martin: Journal of Biology 2009, 8:82

