Minireview

Life and death as a T lymphocyte: from immune protection to HIV
pathogenesis
Nienke Vrisekoop¤, Judith N Mandl¤ and Ronald N Germain

Address: Lymphocyte Biology Section, Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, 10 Center Dr MSC-1892, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
¤Contributed

equally

Correspondence: Nienke Vrisekoop. Email: vnienke@niaid.nih.gov

Abstract
Detailed analysis of T cell dynamics in humans is challenging and
mouse models can be important tools for characterizing T  cell
dynamic processes. In a paper just published in Journal
of Biology, Marques et al. suggest that a mouse model in which
activated CD4+ T cells are deleted has relevance for HIV infection.
See research article http://jbiol.com/content/8/10/93

T lymphocytes have a difficult existence. As mature cells,
they are essential for immunity to infection, but in the
early stages of their development in the thymus, more than
90% of them fail selection for the appropriate antigen
receptors and die before export to the peripheral immune
system. Those that achieve maturity spend weeks, months
or even years circulating through the body, in constant
search of a foreign antigen that their antigen-specific
receptor can recognize, and needing continuously to
compete for trophic signals necessary for their survival.
Most fail to find an antigenic match and remain as small
resting cells until death. A few encounter the right partner
and undergo a transient bout of exponential clonal
expansion, only for more than 90% of these progeny to be
lost by apoptosis shortly after the antigen is cleared. The
remaining 10% are maintained as memory cells (Figure 1),
conferring lasting protection.
In normal individuals the T cell population shows excellent
homeostatic control, with stable numbers for decades in
adult humans, except for intermittent bursts of expansion
during infection. Moreover, this homeostasis applies not
only to the total number of T cells but to the proportions
of  these cells in the two major functional subsets of
T lymphocytes – CD8+ T cells, whose principal function is
to kill virus-infected cells, and CD4+ T cells, which are
critical for activating other immune cells, including CD8+
T  cells and the B cells that secrete antibodies. Under­
standing what happens to the performance of the immune
system when this balance is disturbed is of both funda­
mental interest and clinical relevance. In perhaps one of

http://jbiol.com/content/8/10/91	

the most relevant examples, HIV-infected individuals lose
their CD4+ T cells, a loss that results in acquired immuno­
deficiency syndrome (AIDS) and death from secondary
infections if the original infection is untreated.
In this issue of Journal of Biology, Marques et al. [1]
present a novel genetic approach to eliminating CD4+
T cells that the authors present as a mouse model of HIVinduced CD4+ T cell death. Marques et al. [1] marked
activated CD4+ T cells for elimination in mice through
manipulation of the genetic locus encoding a protein
known as OX40 (TNFRSF4), which is expressed by almost
all antigen-stimulated (and thus activated) CD4+ T cells
[2]. Their strategy was to construct a mouse in which the
Tnfrsf4 gene encoding OX40 drives expression of Cre
recombinase. This enzyme, in turn, mediates the activation
of a gene encoding diphtheria toxin A fragment (DTA),
whose expression results in the death of the activated CD4+
T cell within 48 hours of induction of OX40 expression. In
these mice (referred to from here on as OX40-DTA mice),

Normal mouse (CD4+ and CD8+ T cell compartments)
High
thymic
output

Thymus

Incorporation
of RTEs into
naïve pool

Naïve
T cells

Division
Ag-driven
differentiation

Death

Memory
T cells

Death

Figure 1
Schematic diagram of T cell dynamics in normal mice. Arrows
denote the rate of death and division or of transit from one pool to
another. Naïve T cells are T cells that have matured and left the
thymus where they are generated, but have not yet encountered
antigen. RTEs, recent thymic emigrants; Ag, antigen.

Vrisekoop et al.: Journal of Biology 2009, 8:91

91.2

about 55% of memory CD4+ T cells are always in the
process of being deleted, whereas other immune cell
populations, including naïve circulating CD4+ T cells,
remain largely intact in overall number, although they
show an increased rate of conversion to an activated state.
The loss of activated CD4+ T cells is accompanied by partial
immunodeficiency, which was seen following infection
with Friend virus, influenza A virus and Pneumocystis
murina. In these several respects, the model phenocopies
some of the pathology of HIV infection, and it would be
tempting, therefore, to conclude that these data show that
direct cytopathicity of HIV for activated CD4+ T cells is the
driving force in the T cell loss and resulting
immunodeficiency in AIDS patients.
However, there is a complication. A subpopulation of CD4+
T cells called T regulatory cells (Tregs) that suppresses
immune activation and is thought to be important in
preventing autoimmunity is specifically targeted in the
OX40-DTA mouse. (The different subsets of CD4+ T cells
are illustrated in Figure 2). Most Tregs constitutively
express OX40 [3], and Marques et al. [1] find that more
than 80% of these T cells are also lost in the OX40-DTA
mice. Their data suggest that the loss of these regulatory
and/or activated CD4+ T cells results in substantial
changes in T  cell dynamics and induces chronic immune
activation, which is a key characteristic of HIV infection.
This raises interesting questions about both lymphocyte
dynamics in the absence of antigen and the possible
relevance of these results [1] to HIV infection.

Naïve
CD4+ T cell

Activation of
naïve T cells

TH1

TH17

Treg

TH2

Dendritic
cells

Eosinophils,
basophils,
mast cells,
alternatively
activated
macrophages
B cells

CD4+ T cell loss in HIV-infected individuals

Although it is known that HIV kills activated CD4+ T cells,
it is still a major unresolved question why these cells
progressively decline after infection. It is clear that in
infected individuals, the rate of loss of CD4+ T cells is
greater than the rate of production, so that the CD4+ T cell
pool is gradually eroded over time, but how the balance
between these processes is impaired remains to be
determined. It is unlikely that direct killing of infected
target cells by HIV is sufficient to cause CD4+ T cell
depletion. Natural hosts for simian immunodeficiency
virus (SIV), such as sooty mangabeys, do not progress to
AIDS and maintain near-normal peripheral CD4+ T cell
numbers despite high rates of viral replication [4]. In fact,
the level of immune activation during HIV infection is a
better predictor of disease progression than is viral
load.  This chronic generalized immune activation is
characterized by an increased rate of exit of CD4+ and
CD8+ T cells and of natural killer (NK) cells from the
resting state, increased T and NK cell turnover and death,
polyclonal
B
cell
activation
with
increased
immunoglobulin levels, and elevated production of proinflammatory cytokines. Consistent with the reported
association between chronic immune activation and
disease pro­gression, chronic immune activation is not

http://jbiol.com/content/8/10/91	

Neutrophils
Activated
macrophages,
NK cells,
CD8+ T cells
B cells

Figure 2
The major subsets of CD4+ T cells that differentiate from naïve circulating
cells. Naïve T cells differentiate into at least four functional subsets
following stimulation by antigen presented by dendritic cells, which are
specialized for driving the activation of T cells and are thought to help
direct their differentiation by differential secretion of cytokines determining
the different subsets. Three subsets – TH1, TH2 and TH17 – activate
other immune cells with distinct roles in immunity, including B cells, which
secrete antibody, natural killer (NK) cells, which are important in defense
against viruses, and inflammatory cells, such as neutrophils and
macrophages (which also have non-inflammatory functions). The fourth
subset shown here comprises regulatory T cells (Tregs), which suppress
the activation of the other subsets, partly by acting on dendritic cells.
Modified from Figure 5-22 in DeFranco AL, Locksley RM, Robertson M:
Immunity: The Immune Response in Infectious and Inflammatory
Disease. London: New Science Press; 2007.

Vrisekoop et al.: Journal of Biology 2009, 8:91

91.3

seen following SIV infection in natural hosts that do not
progress to AIDS [4].
Two general causal models have been proposed to account
for the association between HIV infection and immune
activation. The first is that T cell homeostasis is disrupted
by the chronic activation of the innate immune system by
HIV infection. The cells of the innate immune system
recognize and are activated by conserved components of
microorganisms, and include inflammatory cells and
specialized cells known as dendritic cells that are critical in
the activation of T lymphocytes (Figure 2). HIV stimulates
innate immunity in two ways. It directly activates a subset
of dendritic cells known as plasmacytoid dendritic cells,
leading to production of large amounts of type I interferon,
an antiviral cytokine that has been associated with disease
progression [5,6]. HIV can also indirectly cause innate
immune stimulation because the infection results in
damage to the integrity of mucosal surfaces and the
translocation of pro-inflammatory microbial products
from the intestinal lumen into the circulation [7]. The
ensuing release of inflammatory cytokines by innate
immune cells may result in generalized immune cell
activation, increasing T cell division and promoting
senescence, apoptotic death or clearance by various
mechanisms. Chronic immune activation may also result
in bone marrow suppression, reduced thymic function and
changes in lymphoid tissue architecture, all of which could
reduce the capacity of the T cell pool to maintain itself.
The second possibility is the inverse – that HIV infection
dysregulates CD4+ T cell homeostasis and that it is the
decline in CD4+ T cell numbers that leads to chronic
immune activation. However, HIV infection is associated
with activation of multiple distinct branches of the immune
system, and it is not obvious how this could reflect a simple
homeostatic response to the loss of CD4+ T cells. It is also
difficult to reconcile with the observation that there is a
rapid decrease in levels of immune activation following
antiretroviral therapy, despite persistent low CD4+ T cell
numbers [8]. A variant of the CD4+ T depletion hypothesis
more consistent with available data is that the loss of
particular subsets of effector CD4+ T cells, presumably as a
result of direct viral depletion, may contribute to
generalized immune activation. For instance, the reduced
level of TH17-type CD4+ T cells (Figure 2) in the
gastrointestinal tract has been proposed to have a key role
in the loss of the integrity of the intestinal mucosa during
HIV infection, enabling the translocation of microbial
constituents from the intestinal tract into the systemic
circulation, as discussed above [9]. It has also been
suggested that a reduction in Tregs contributes to the
aberrant levels of immune activation, as concluded by
Marques et al. [1], although (as discussed in their paper
and below) it is still unclear whether this population is
indeed decreased during HIV infection [10].

http://jbiol.com/content/8/10/91	

Clearly, the two possible causal relationships between
chronic immune activation and CD4+ T cell loss are not
mutually exclusive. In fact, chronic immune activation and
the loss of CD4+ T cells may amplify each other in a loop
that makes it difficult to establish which process underlies
and drives the other.
Given the complexity of T cell dynamics and the numerous
as yet undefined perturbations to normal T cell homeo­stasis
that HIV is likely to induce either directly or indirectly,
together with the difficulties in following the dynamic
changes in the T cell compartment in the whole body in
humans or primates, there is a case to be made for investi­
gating aspects of HIV pathogenesis in mouse models.
Although any results have to be extrapolated to the human
system with caution, the extensive array of tools available
in experimental mouse models to track the rates of division
and death of T cells, the rates of flux between naïve and
memory pools, and the maintenance of T cell populations over
time within lymphoid and peripheral tissues enables a more
complete accounting of T cell numbers to be undertaken.
Marques et al. [1] suggest that the OX40-DTA mouse is
one approach to this issue and that the findings in these
mice provide insight into the control of lymphocyte
dynamics in HIV-infected humans. Indeed, in the absence
of exogenous infection, OX40-DTA mice do show features
consistent with generalized immune activation (Table 1),
including an expansion of memory CD8+ T cell numbers
that inverts the usual CD4+:CD8+ T cell ratio, and
increased serum levels of inflammatory cytokines. This
generalized activation cannot be attributed to the release of
Table 1
Cellular dynamics in OX40-DTA mouse model [1]
		
		

Numbers (%)*
(YFP+ (%)†)	 Turnover	

CD4+	

Naïve	

–12 (8)	

	

Memory	 0 (55)	

Ki67 ↑, BrdU ≈	

↑

	

Treg	

–40 (80)	

Ki67 ↑, BrdU ↑	

↑

CD8+	

Naïve	

+4 (1)	

CFSE ≈	

ND

	

Memory	 +133 (3)	

BrdU ≈	

ND

B cells		

Death‡

CFSE ↑, Ki67 ≈, BrdU ≈	 ND§

+53		

*Percentage decrease or increase in cell population numbers compared
with normal controls. †Percentage of cell population marked for DTAmediated deletion by the yellow fluorescent protein marker (YFP).
‡Determined by loss of BrdU-labeled cells, which might also be
influenced by dilution of label following proliferation. ND, not done;
≈, approximately equal to normal controls; ↑, increased compared with
normal controls; §BrdU labeling was too low to be determined. The
method by which cell turnover was assessed is indicated: BrdU,
bromodeoxyuridine, is incorporated into the DNA of proliferating cells
upon administration to mice; CFSE, carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl
ester, is diluted out from adoptively transferred CFSE-labeled cells with
each successive division; Ki67, a protein that is expressed in the
nucleus of recently divided cells.

Vrisekoop et al.: Journal of Biology 2009, 8:91

91.4

microbial components into the circulation from the gut,
because deletion of activated CD4+ T cells does not in itself
lead to a breach in the gut epithelium. Notably, Marques
et al. [1] show that the expansion of effector CD8+ T cells
and increases in serum levels of inflammatory cytokines
can be reversed following reintroduction of Tregs from
normal mice, suggesting that the increased immune
activation in OX40-DTA mice can in part be ascribed to a
Treg insufficiency, which they propose is a key event in
HIV-infected individuals leading to CD4+ T cell depletion.
However, the reality is a bit more complicated, as we
discuss below.

OX40-DTA mouse
CD4+ T cell compartment

Thymus

Naïve and memory CD4+ T cell division and death rates
(turnover) are increased in both HIV infection and the
OX40-DTA mouse. However, whether the increased
turnover of the CD4+ compartment in the OX40-DTA
mouse is a result of Treg depletion or of the deletion of
activated cells, or both, is not yet clear. If the increased
recruitment of naïve CD4+ T cells in OX40-DTA mice is
due to Treg depletion, why are naïve CD8+ T cells
unaffected by the loss of these regulatory cells? Perhaps
the more likely explanation for the increased turnover of
the naïve and memory CD4+ T cell pool is that it results
directly from the continuous depletion of activated CD4+
T  cells, which provides empty niches and removes the
competition for signals (cytokines and other molecules)
required for transit into the activated/memory pool. This
would explain why naïve CD4+ T cells but not naïve CD8+
T  cells are being recruited to the memory pool in the
OX40-DTA mouse.
It is still a matter of debate whether continuous
recruitment of naïve T cells is required to maintain CD4+ T
cell numbers during HIV infection, because memory cells
themselves are self-renewing. On one hand, the increased
naïve T cell turnover and decreased naïve T cell numbers
during HIV infection [8,11] have led to the hypothesis that
progression to AIDS occurs because continuous
recruitment of naïve T cells is required to maintain the
memory pool and this eventually becomes unsustainable
[12]. On the other hand, SIV-infected rhesus macaques can
progress to AIDS without naïve CD4+ T cell depletion [13],

http://jbiol.com/content/8/10/91	

Naïve
CD4+ T
cells

Increased
entry into
OX40memory pool

Memory
CD4+ T
cells

OX40+

Increased death
(DTA-mediated)
Size of memory
CD4+ T cell pool
unchanged

Size of naïve CD4+ T
cell pool unchanged
(in presence of
thymus)

T cell dynamics in OX40-DTA mice and HIVinfected humans

Changes in the underlying dynamics of the CD4+ and CD8+
T cell compartments in the OX40-DTA mouse are
summarized in Table 1 and Figure 3. Although there is no
alteration in the size of the naïve and memory CD4+ T cell
pools, there is an increase in the rate of entry of naïve CD4+
T cells into the memory compartment, and an increase in
turnover in both. In contrast, the rate of entry of naïve
CD8+ T cells into the memory compartment remains
unchanged, but the size of the memory CD8+ T cell
compartment is almost doubled (Figure 3).

Increased
division

Increased
incorporation
Unchanged of RTEs into
thymic output naïve pool

CD8+ T cell compartment

Thymus

Naïve
CD8+ T
cells

Size of naïve CD8+ T
cell pool unchanged

Tregs

Memory
CD8+ T
cells

Increase in size of
effector/memory
CD8+ T cell pool

Figure 3
Schematic diagram of dynamic changes in T cell compartments
described in OX40-DTA mice [1]. The changes in the widths of the
arrows from Figure 1 denote the changes in rates of death and
division or of transit from one pool to another compared to normal
mice. RTEs, recent thymic emigrants.

arguing against a role for CD4+ naïve T cell depletion in
disease progression. However, in SIV-infected rhesus
macaques, in which disease progression is generally faster
than it is in HIV-infected humans, decreases in naïve CD4+
T cell numbers have been observed over time in animals
with slower disease progression, while CD4+ T cell
numbers in more rapidly progressing animals remain
near-normal [14]. This might imply that continuously
recruiting naïve T cells into the memory pool can actually
delay disease progression.
What do we learn from the OX40-DTA mouse? In these
animals, even the ongoing depletion of nearly all activated
CD4+ T cells does not result in the progressive erosion of
naïve and memory CD4+ T cells seen during HIV infection
[1]. Thus, artificially increasing the death of activated CD4+
T cells does not, on its own, seem to have any impact on
CD4+ T cell compartment homeostasis. However, this may,
at least in part, reflect a difference between humans and
mice, in that thymic output in adult mice is relatively high
compared with that of humans in mid-life [15] and could
counteract the losses in the naïve CD4+ T cell pool in the
OX40-DTA mouse. There are other important differences

Vrisekoop et al.: Journal of Biology 2009, 8:91

91.5

in lymphoid dynamics between the OX40-DTA mouse and
HIV-infected humans: memory CD8+ T cell numbers are
increased in both, yet although memory CD8+ turnover
seems unaffected in OX40-DTA mice, it is increased during
HIV infection [8]. Naïve CD8+ T cell numbers and recruit­
ment are unaltered in the OX40-DTA mouse model, whereas
naïve CD8+ T cell numbers are decreased and their proli­
fera­tion is increased during HIV infection [8,11]. These
considerations limit the extent to which data in the mouse
can be directly extrapolated to HIV-infected humans.

Regulatory T cells in HIV infection

Is the role suggested by Marques et al. [1] for Tregs in
immune activation in the OX40-DTA mouse consistent
with what we know about HIV infection? This question is
not straightforward to answer. HIV does not demonstrably
infect Tregs at a higher frequency than non-Treg CD4+
T  cells [16], so these cells would not be expected to be
deleted preferentially as is the case in the OX40-DTA
mouse. But neither the role nor the status of Tregs in HIV
infection is clear. First, opposing roles have been
hypothesized for Tregs [10,17], each with some evidence to
support it. On the one hand, Tregs are thought to have a
detrimental effect during HIV infection by suppressing
anti-HIV immune responses. Indeed, a positive correlation
has been described between the fraction of Tregs within
the CD4+ T cell pool and viral load (reviewed in [10]). On
the other hand, Tregs have been hypothesized to be
beneficial by reducing chronic immune activation and
limiting inflammatory responses. Evidence for this comes
from studies showing a negative correlation between the
percentage of Tregs within total T cells and both CD4+ and
CD8+ T cell activation [17]. Second, the status of Tregs in
HIV-infected individuals is murky, with reports suggesting
both increased and decreased numbers, perhaps because
of different assays used to measure the size of this
compartment. Furthermore, in correlating disease
progression with Tregs, the measure of Tregs that is used
(for example, the Treg fraction within CD4+ T cells, within
total T cells or within total hematopoietic cells, or the
absolute numbers of Tregs) can greatly influence the
outcome of the analysis. Part of the problem is that
whereas in mice Tregs can be unambiguously identified by
two markers – the transcription factor FoxP3, which is
exclusively expressed by Tregs in this species, and high
levels of CD25, a cytokine receptor expressed on activated
T cells – in humans, CD25 levels on Tregs are only
marginally higher than those on effector CD4+ T cells, and
FoxP3 is not exclusively expressed by Tregs, so they are
more difficult to quantify accurately.

The role of microbial translocation

During HIV infection, high systemic levels of the microbial
product lipopolysaccharide, a potent inflammatory stimulus
also known as endotoxin, have been shown to correlate
with increased T cell activation. Despite this correlation, it

http://jbiol.com/content/8/10/91	

has not been clear whether endotoxemia directly causes
chronic immune activation and concomi­tant CD4+ T cell
depletion, or whether it only reflects loss of CD4+ host
protection or the amount of mucosal damage by existing
levels of immune activation. Marques et al. [1] have
addressed this important question by extending their
studies to a second model mouse (the NEMO mouse [18]),
which is engineered to allow systemic leakage of microbial
components from the gut (known as microbial trans­
location), and they do not detect any striking effects on
T  cell numbers or incorporation of bromodeoxyuridine
(BrdU) in these mice, suggesting that microbial trans­
location may not be the cause of general immune
activation. However, further analysis is warranted before a
role for microbial translocation on T cell dynamics can be
excluded.

A reductionist approach to HIV pathogenesis

Where do all these twists and turns leave us, especially
with respect to the insights that can be gleaned from the
Marques et al. study [1]? Although mouse models are
unlikely to entirely reproduce the complex etiology of
AIDS, there is a clear need to shed more light on the
dynamic processes underlying disease progression during
HIV infection, and experimental models may provide
important opportunities to do so. With the goal of
investigating key processes in the absence of direct
infection, rather than replicating HIV pathogenesis, it is
likely that not only the similarities with HIV infection, but
also the differences, will teach us something about the
basic biology of the system. For instance, the study by
Marques et al. [1] highlights the impact that the depletion
of activated CD4+ T cells can have on the dynamics of the
CD4+ T cell pool and shows that imbalances that result
from this process can, by causing a deficiency of Tregs,
affect other branches of the immune system. Interestingly,
in this mouse model the depletion of activated CD4+ T cells
does not progressively erode the CD4+ T cell pool, suggest­
ing that even removing a large proportion of activated
CD4+ T cells does not, on its own, impair the renewal
capacity of the CD4+ T cell compartment. (However, the
continuous recruitment of naïve CD4+ T cells was required
to prevent the erosion of the CD4+ T cell pool, and as we
pointed out earlier, this may be harder to sustain in
humans because of loss of thymic function). In addition,
systemic microbial translocation did not induce any
immediate changes resembling the cellular dynamics seen
during HIV infection.
Overall, insights gained from such reductionist approaches
might inform studies more difficult to undertake in
humans or primates. In addition, they may generate novel
hypotheses as to how the balance of production and loss of
CD4+ T cells can be therapeutically altered in the setting of
HIV infection to prevent the decline of CD4+ T cells or
restore their renewal capacity.

Vrisekoop et al.: Journal of Biology 2009, 8:91

91.6

Acknowledgements

The authors’ work is supported by the Intramural Research Program
of NIAID, NIH, by The Netherlands Organization for Scientific
Research (NV) and by the NIH Office of AIDS Research (JNM). The
opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect official views of NIAID or NIH.

References
1.	

2.	
3.	

4.	

5.	

6.	

7.	

8.	

9.	

Marques R, Williams A, Eksmond U, Wullaert A, Killeen N,
Pasparakis M, Kioussis D, Kassiotis G: Generalized immune
activation as a direct result of activated CD4 T cell killing. J
Biol 2009, 8:93.
Croft M, So T, Duan W, Soroosh P: The significance of OX40
and OX40L to T-cell biology and immune disease. Immunol
Rev 2009, 229:173-191.
Takeda I, Ine S, Killeen N, Ndhlovu LC, Murata K, Satomi S,
Sugamura K, Ishii N: Distinct roles for the OX40-OX40 ligand
interaction in regulatory and nonregulatory T cells. J
Immunol 2004, 172:3580-3589.
Silvestri G, Sodora DL, Koup RA, Paiardini M, O’Neil SP,
McClure HM, Staprans SI, Feinberg MB: Nonpathogenic SIV
infection of sooty mangabeys is characterized by limited
bystander immunopathology despite chronic high-level
viremia. Immunity 2003, 18:441-452.
Mandl JN, Barry AP, Vanderford TH, Kozyr N, Chavan R,
Klucking S, Barrat FJ, Coffman RL, Staprans S, Feinberg MB:
Divergent TLR7/9 signaling and type I interferon production distinguish pathogenic and non-pathogenic SIV infections. Nat Med 2008, 14:1077-1087.
Meier A, Chang JJ, Chan ES, Pollard RB, Sidhu HK, Kulkarni
S, Wen TF, Lindsay RJ, Orellana L, Mildvan D, Bazner S,
Streeck H, Alter G, Lifson JD, Carrington M, Bosch RJ, Robbins
GK, Altfeld M: Sex differences in the Toll-like receptor-mediated response of plasmacytoid dendritic cells to HIV-1.
Nature Med 2009, 15:955-959.
Brenchley JM, Price DA, Schacker TW, Asher TE, Silvestri G,
Rao S, Kazzaz Z, Bornstein E, Lambotte O, Altmann D, Blazar
BR, Rodriguez B, Teixeira-Johnson L, Landay A, Martin JN,
Hecht FM, Picker LJ, Lederman MM, Deeks SG, Douek DC:
Microbial translocation is a cause of systemic immune
activation in chronic HIV infection. Nat Med 2006, 12:13651371.
Hazenberg MD, Stuart JW, Otto SA, Borleffs JC, Boucher CA,
de Boer RJ, Miedema F, Hamann D: T-cell division in human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 infection is mainly due to
immune activation: a longitudinal analysis in patients
before and during highly active antiretroviral therapy
(HAART). Blood 2000, 95:249-255.
Brenchley JM, Paiardini M, Knox KS, Asher AI, Cervasi B,
Asher TE, Scheinberg P, Price DA, Hage CA, Kholi LM, Khoruts
A, Frank I, Else J, Schacker T, Silvestri G, Douek DC:

http://jbiol.com/content/8/10/91	

10.	
11.	
12.	
13.	

14.	

15.	

16.	

17.	

18.	

Differential Th17 CD4 T cell depletion in pathogenic and
nonpathogenic lentiviral infections. Blood 2008, 112:28262835.
de St Groth BF, Landay AL: Regulatory T cells in HIV infection: pathogenic or protective participants in the immune
response? AIDS 2008, 22:671-683.
Roederer M, Dubs JG, Anderson MT, Raju PA, Herzenberg LA:
CD8 naive T cell counts decrease progressively in HIVinfected adults. J Clin Invest 1995, 95:2061-2066.
Hazenberg MD, Hamann D, Schuitemaker H, Miedema F: T
cell depletion in HIV-1 infection: how CD4+ T cells go out
of stock. Nat Immunol 2000, 1:285-289.
Okoye A, Meier-Schellersheim M, Brenchley JM, Hagen SI,
Walker JM, Rohankhedkar M, Lum R, Edgar JB, Planer SL,
Legasse A, Sylwester AW, Piatak M Jr, Lifson JD, Maino VC,
Sodora DL, Douek DC, Axthelm MK, Grossman Z, Picker LJ:
Progressive CD4+ central memory T cell decline results in
CD4+ effector memory insufficiency and overt disease in
chronic SIV infection. J Exp Med 2007, 204:2171-2185.
Brown CR, Czapiga M, Kabat J, Dang Q, Ourmanov I,
Nishimura Y, Martin MA, Hirsch VM: Unique pathology in
simian immunodeficiency virus-infected rapid progressor
macaques is consistent with a pathogenesis distinct from
that of classical AIDS. J Virol 2007, 81:5594-5606.
Vrisekoop N, den Braber I, de Boer AB, Ruiter AF, Ackermans
MT, van der Crabben SN, Schrijver EH, Spierenburg G,
Sauerwein HP, Hazenberg MD, de Boer RJ, Miedema F,
Borghans JA, Tesselaar K: Sparse production but preferential incorporation of recently produced naive T cells in the
human peripheral pool. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008,
105:6115-6120.
Chase AJ, Yang HC, Zhang H, Blankson JN, Siliciano RF:
Preservation of FoxP3+ regulatory T cells in the peripheral
blood of human immunodeficiency virus type 1-infected
elite suppressors correlates with low CD4+ T-cell activation. J Virol 2008, 82:8307-8315.
Eggena MP, Barugahare B, Jones N, Okello M, Mutalya S,
Kityo C, Mugyenyi P, Cao H: Depletion of regulatory T cells
in HIV infection is associated with immune activation. J
Immunol 2005, 174:4407-4414.
Nenci A, Becker C, Wullaert A, Gareus R, van Loo G, Danese
S, Huth M, Nikolaev A, Neufert C, Madison B, Gumucio D,
Neurath MF, Pasparakis M: Epithelial NEMO links innate
immunity to chronic intestinal inflammation. Nature 2007,
446:557-561.

Published: 27 November 2009
doi:10.1186/jbiol198
© 2009 BioMed Central Ltd

Vrisekoop et al.: Journal of Biology 2009, 8:91

